Rec. ITU-R BT.1359-1 1
RECOMMENDATION  ITU-R  BT.1359-1
RELATIVE  TIMING  OF  SOUND  AND  VISION  FOR  BROADCASTING
(Question ITU-R 35/11)
(1998)
Rec. ITU-R BT.1359-1
The ITU Radiocommunication Assembly,
considering
a) that a perceptible time difference between the sound and vision components of a television signal impairs the
viewers’ reception of the programme;
b) that separate picture and sound processing is becoming more and more widely used in broadcasting systems;
c) that digital production and distribution equipment causes differential delay between the sound and vision
signals;
d) that programme production may involve tandem connected studios;
e) that in studios the sound/vision relative timing should be the responsibility of the programme production
directors;
f) that the transmitting equipment and the receiver may introduce an additional, variable timing difference;
g) that subjective evaluations show that detectability thresholds are about +45 ms to –125 ms and acceptability
thresholds are about +90 ms to –185 ms on the average, a positive value indicates that sound is advanced with respect to
vision,
recommends with reference to Figure 1
1 that the timing zero, as a reference for the subsequent measurement of the relative timing of sound and vision
signals is defined at the point of the final programme source selection element*;
2 that the overall tolerance in sound/picture timing (between points 1’ and 6’) shall not exceed +90 ms or –
185 ms;
3 that the timing tolerance between image source (point 1) and the zero reference point as defined in
recommends 1 above be taken as falling within the limits of +25 ms and -100 ms (Note that this is the zone within which
the programme producer may exercise control over the relative timing of sound and picture. It is not possible to identify
the correct or intended timing within this range, first because of the “plateau of undetectability” as noted in Appendix 1
Figure 2 and secondly because the producer may have selected “for artistic effect” a non-zero relative timing.);
4 that the timing difference in the path from the output of the final programme source selection element * to the
input to the transmitter for emission should be kept within the values +22.5 ms and –30 ms**;
5 if correction of errors is not possible then each downstream segment that is not under the control of the
broadcaster shall not introduce any timing error in excess of –2 ms.
Annex 1 outlines the user requirements for the corrections of relative timing difference of sound and vision signals
which were used in preparing this recommendation.
Appendix 1 is an explanation of the selection of the recommended timing difference values.
Appendix 2 details currently used conditions for subjective assessment of sound/vision delay difference testing.
NOTE 1 – A positive value indicates that sound is advanced with respect to vision.
NOTE 2 – Studies should be made of time stamping in such a way as to facilitate the maintenance and correct timing at
appropriate points in the broadcast chain.
____________________
* The definition of this point may vary depending on the particular broadcast organization and operating requirements. Typical
examples are master control, network control, master switching or outside broadcast control.
** Where the path from the output of the final programme source selection element to the input of the transmitter is comprised of
one or more digital codecs it should be noted that Recommendation ITU-R BT.1203 specifies that the delay error introduced by
any single digital codec should be in the range –2 ms.
 
2 Rec. ITU-R BT.1359-1 
 
1359-01
22 '1'' 33 ' 44 ' 511 '
21''11 '
66 '5'
Outside
Broadcast
Outside
Broadcast
Compilation
Station(1)
Local
Station(1)CodecCodec
Contribution Distribution
STL Local
transmitter
FIGURE 1
Simplified reference chain for television sound/vision timing
(1) This includes synchronization equipment needed such as frame synchronizer
 
Rec. ITU-R BT.1359-1 3
ANNEX  1
User requirements for the correction of relative timing
difference of sound and vision signals
When implementing the correction of relative timing difference or error of sound and vision signals, the following user
requirements should be satisfied.
1 In the case of on-line correction of the timing error of sound and vision signals, the audio quality of the sound
signal when observed at the output of the sound signal timing corrector, should be maintained at the start of, during and
at the end of the correction, with the quality of 4.5 or higher, when evaluated using the subjective evaluation method
based on the ITU-R five-grade impairment scale and the results are presented using the diffgrade.
2 The correction of the relative timing error of the sound and vision signals should be carried out within a
responsibility boundary in the signal chain.
3 The standard reference signals intended for the off-line use for the measurement and/or correction of the error
should be able to be observed by the eye and ear, while they should be measured by at least using a piece of equipment
displaying the timing difference of the two signals.
4 The cost of the equipment to produce the reference signals and/or to measure the timing difference should be
within a reasonable range.
APPENDIX  1
Explanation for the selection of the recommended value
for sound/vision timing difference
1 It is known for many years from experience with film projection that the relative timing between picture and
sound is very important and shows an identifiable point at which the timing error becomes objectionable to the viewer.
Recommendation ITU-R BR.265 indicates that the precision of accuracy of location of sound and picture information
should be within – half a frame. For 24 fps film, this is an acceptable variation of about –22 ms.
2 Differing imaging techniques generating source television signals appear to introduce unavoidable uncertainty
of the actual sound/vision timing of about half a television field.
3 Subjective evaluations undertaken in Japan, Switzerland and Australia show a high degree of similarity in the
sensitivity of viewers to errors in sound/vision timing in television material for NTSC and PAL systems. Tests
conducted have shown that the thresholds of detectability are about + 45 ms to –125 ms and thresholds of acceptability
are about +90 ms to –185 ms on the average. Each set of test results indicates a broad area of acceptable timing covering
“sound leading” through zero timing difference to “sound delayed”. The range of timing between the “just detectable”
limits of sound leading and sound delayed is about 170 ms. Each case also shows a clearly defined and rather consistent
range of values for the difference (1 grade) between detectable and acceptable limits of about 45 ms for sound leading
and about 60 ms for sound delayed as shown in Figure 2.
4 Rec. ITU-R BT.1359-1 
1359-02
– 200 – 180 – 160 – 140 – 120 – 100 – 80 – 60 – 40 – 20 0 20 40 60 80 100
– 2
– 1
0
A
B
CC '
B'
A'
– 1.5
– 0.5
Subjective evaluation results (Diffgrade)
Sound delay wrt
vision
Sound advanced wrt
vision
Undetectability plateau
Detectability threshold
Acceptability threshold
FIGURE 2
Detectability and acceptability thresholds
Delay time (ms)
 
 
 
 
4 For the purpose of establishing a Recommendation concerning an agreed limit to sound/vision timing error in 
television, the range of values between the detectable limits is not relevant. The actual timing value is the province of the 
programme producer in the studio. Because we do not necessarily know, and have no recommended way of determining, 
the precise timing difference, we accept as being correct the relative timing that occurs at the studio output. An 
unsatisfactory situation may now exist because the studio output timing may be set to be very close to one of the limits of 
perceptibility and thus there is a limited margin of additional error before the timing error is such as to become 
unacceptable. 
5 Because of the undetectable plateau (C-C’, see Figure 2) the limit of allowable error should be constrained 
within 0.5 grade points (5 point impairment scale) above the subjectively evaluated detectable threshold (B-B’). The 
subjective evaluations have shown that a one grade point impairment results in a 60 ms change in delay which is shown 
on Figure 2 as the rising slope from A-B. The allowable delay should be constrained within a half grade point 
impairment which is 30 ms shown in Figure 2 on the rising slope from B-C. Likewise the advance limit is determined to 
be 22.5 ms from the rise on the slope from B’-C’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rec. ITU-R BT.1359-1 5
APPENDIX  2
Currently used conditions for subjective assessment
of sound/vision delay difference testing
1 Distance between source and
microphone
50 cm
2 Distance between loudspeaker
and assessor
200 cm Assessors should be able to easily see lip movements
of announcers.
If a 22” diagonal monitor is used the display and
loudspeaker will be in approximately the same position
and this equates to a 6H viewing distance.
3 Parameter(s) for measurement Acceptable thresholds (i.e.
rating 3.5 on DSIS)
But it is also considered important to measure the
“detectability” thresholds (i.e. rating 4.5 on DSIS).
4 Camera type Tube camera
5 Evaluation method Double stimulus impairment
scale method
6 Viewing conditions Recs. ITU-R BT.500 and 1128
7 Range of sound/vision timing
differences to be included on
tape(s)
Must include full range of
impairments, grade 1
through 5
Based on Swiss PTT work the range –200 to +300 ms
should be assessed.
To obtain precision in assessment of “detectable”
thresholds a second tape with a concentration of values
around the detectable threshold points may be
required.
8 Test material Female newsreader To avoid viewer fatigue it is desirable that several
different sequences and/or announcers be used.
9 Duration of test session Less than 30 minutes It may be necessary to hold two sessions if both
“acceptable” and “detectable” thresholds are to be
accurately assessed.
10 Type of assessors Expert and non-expert
11 Number of assessors At least 15
12 Age of assessors To be stated
13 Visual acuity of assessors Normal (or corrected to
normal) acuity assessed using
a Snellen chart