The Influence of Variable Frame Timing on First-Person Gaming
DEVI KLEIN, NVIDIA, USA and UC Santa Barbara, USA
JOSEF SPJUT, BEN BOUDAOUD, and JOOHWAN KIM,NVIDIA, USA
0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030
2
3
4
5
6
Mean Frame Duration [s]
Smoothness Score
A = 0 ms
A = 2 ms
A = 4 ms
A = 6 ms
Fig. 1. (Top Left) A demonstration of the visual effects of variable frame timing. (Bottom Left) A demonstration of how variable render/simulation workload
timing impacts VSYNC and variable refresh rate (VRR) differently. (Right) A plot of a user rating of "smoothness" under varying mean frame time and VFT
amplitude (2-6 ms). Generally smoothness decreases with increased frame time, as expected, with additional degredations of smoothness coming from VFT.
Variable frame timing (VFT), or changes in the time intervals between dis-
crete frame images displayed to users, deviates from our traditional concep-
tualization of frame rate in which all frame times are equal. With the advent
of variable refresh rate (VRR) monitor technologies, gamers experience VFT
at the display. VRR, coupled with increased display refresh rates and high-
end hardware, enables smoother variation of frame presentation sequences.
We assess the effects of VFT on the perception of smoothness (experiment
1) and performance (experiment 2) in first-person shooter (FPS) gameplay
by introducing frequent but relatively small (4-12 ms) variations in frame
time around typical refresh rates (30-240 Hz). Our results indicate that VFT
impacts the perception of smoothness. However, the results from experiment
2 do not indicate differences in FPS task performance (i.e., completion time)
between variable and constant frame time sequences ranked equally smooth
in experiment 1.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing→ Pointing devices; User
studies; • Applied computing→ Computer games.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: frame rate, frame time, first-person
targeting, first-person games, perception, performance
ACM Reference Format:
Devi Klein, Josef Spjut, Ben Boudaoud, and Joohwan Kim. 2023. The Influence
of Variable Frame Timing on First-Person Gaming. 1, 1 (June 2023), 12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Our visual perception arises from a continuous-to-continuous map-
ping between the light reflected off objects in our 3D environment
and entering our eye and the electrochemical transduction process
occurring at the back of the retina [18]. With the introduction of
Authors’ addresses: Devi Klein, devik@nvidia.com, NVIDIA, USA and UC Santa Barbara,
USA; Josef Spjut, jspjut@nvidia.com; Ben Boudaoud, bboudaoud@nvidia.com; Joohwan
Kim, sckim@nvidia.com, NVIDIA, USA.
2023. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal
use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in , https:
//doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn.
digital images, high refresh rate displays, and the quantization of
light into discrete bits of information, modern technologies for vi-
sualization attempt to induce the spatio-temporal dynamics of the
visual phototransduction process that drives real-world perception.
Despite the advances in emerging visualization technologies, the
inherent discrete-to-continuous mapping of information can cause
undesirable perceptual effects.
Take for example the prevalent problem ofmotion blur on sample-
and-hold-type displays such as liquid crystal displays (LCDs) [25].
Assume a viewer who is visually tracking a moving object on an
LCD operating at 60 Hz. Because each LCD pixel ideally1 holds its
emission for the duration of one frame time (approximately 16 ms
for a 60 Hz display), its optical image can smear across multiple
retinal cells while the viewer’s gaze continues to move to track
the object. Consequently, the viewer receives a blurry impression
of the moving objects. Display artifacts such as motion blur occur
when the discretized information cannot faithfully approximate the
real-world experience for our visual system.
Prior work has focused on the visibility of motion artifacts for
displays with constant frame time (CFT) (Sec. 2.3). CFT, however, is
more of an idealized phenomenon in gaming due to variations in
render time, input sampling, or network delays. Instead, high-end
modern display technologies (e.g., variable refresh rate displays or
VRR) present users with a sequence of frames that can persist on
screen for different periods, a phenomenon we denote as variable
frame timing (VFT). That is, one frame could last on screen for 16ms
(60Hz), and the next frame could last on screen for 20 ms (50Hz).
Given the prevalence of VFT in modern-day gaming, and the
relatively little empirical work investigating its influence on both
the perception of smoothness and the effect on performance in
1LCD hold time and transition time are not necessarily a function of the frame period.
Some transitions are longer than a frame period; others are short enough to meet this
ideal, but the reality falls short in most LCDs.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
arXiv:2306.01691v1  [cs.GR]  2 Jun 2023
2 • Klein et al.
an FPS-style targeting task, our paper provides the following key
contributions:
(1) An introduction to variable frame timing (VFT). What is it?
Why does it occur?
(2) An exploration of the effects of VFT on human perception
(experiment 1) and performance (experiment 2) across a broad
range of baseline frame rates.
(3) Establishing a relationship between the perception of VFT
and constant frame times (CFT).
(4) Provide suggestions for gamers who want to utilize VFT in
both professional and leisure settings and for researchers who
want to explore VFT in contexts outside of gaming.
2 BACKGROUND
The following sections provide a short primer on VFT and frame tim-
ing. The discussion points and background information underscore
the importance of studying VFT in the wild because it is becoming
more prevalent as users modernize their hardware and software to
state-of-the-art technology. We follow this discussion with a brief
overview of the perceptual quality and performance metrics used
in experiments 1 and 2.
2.1 Where does Variable Frame Timing (VFT) come from?
There are many sources of VFT, including changes in game geome-
try or shading workloads, power state and cooling of PC hardware,
operating system preemption and scheduling, network communi-
cation with a server, and even human interaction with the game.
While these sources interact in different ways, the result is that
game frames are completed after the combination of a variety of
different processing times, with each of these times introducing a
possible source of variability. In general, game frame time variability
is relatively small compared to the total frame time, though this
varies from game to game. Game developers often target a single
constant display output rate and conduct significance testing and
optimization to ensure that most frames finish within the fixed
budget. This constant frame time target avoids bothersome inter-
actions with display synchronization (i.e., VSync) that can amplify
VFT effects when a game overshoots the target refresh period of
the display (e.g., draws a frame for more than 33.3 ms for a 30 Hz
target).
2.2 Frame Rate, Frame Time, and Refresh Rate
Many gamers and researchers use the terms frame rate and frame
time interchangeably [5], but it is important to recognize their rela-
tionship and distinct implied meaning. Frame rate is the number of
frames delivered over some timeframe, typically reported in Hertz
(Hz) or the number of frames per second. Frame time is the time
that elapses between a pair of frames during which the first frame
is displayed, often the time it took to complete the rendering and
display of the second frame in that pair. Assuming frames are com-
pleted on a regular schedule, the frame rate is precisely the inverse
of the frame time (the frame time represents the period of the rate).
However, in the presence of variable rendering times, a single frame
rate cannot accurately represent this variability. Thus, we choose
to focus primarily on frame times in this work. For those familiar
with frame rates, it may be helpful to compute the inverse of a given
frame time to gain an intuition for what regular frame rate that
frame time corresponds to. We include frame rates for our constant
frame time conditions and summarize our variable frame timing
conditions using a 1
𝑋 convention to provide an intuition for the
corresponding frame rates.
More recently (since 2013), variable refresh rate (VRR) technolo-
gies, like G-SYNC [21] and VESA Adaptive Sync [3], have enabled
gaming hardware to deliver frames when they are completed. VRR
avoids the potential large magnitude stutter caused by minor frame
time variations when VSync is on while still avoiding tearing. The
primary functionality that VRR enables is presenting the variation
in frame completion time directly to the display, emitting light to
the eyes of the viewer.
Since the introduction and widespread availability of VRR-enabled
displays and computing systems, researchers have begun to con-
duct studies using this paradigm. For instance, Poth et al. [16] used
G-SYNC to limit the presentation duration of a stimulus to below
10 ms and varied the time in small step sizes to characterize vi-
sual processing time. Others have promoted VRR technology for
potential energy savings by reducing power when display updates
are not needed [12, 31]. Another study measured (constant) refresh
rates for just noticeable differences (JND) of varying target motion,
then leveraged VRR to adjust refresh rate dynamically based on
object speed, but did not study the effects of varying refresh rate
itself [6, 15]. Jindal et al. [ 10] added adaptive rate shading to the
optimizations for motion, spatial shading rate, and temporal rate
but once again neglected to study the effects of varying frame rate
in isolation. This work hints that not all spatio-temporal content has
the same presentation time requirements for the equal perception
of quality but does not answer whether a single target’s motion is
the primary driver of the perception of smoothness or stutter in
VRR contexts.
Other more relevant works studying VRR technologies’ effect
on task performance and perception have indicated positive out-
comes [17, 30]. While subjects struggled to identify when VRR
techniques were enabled, results show significant effects of VRR on
both performance and engagement. Liu et al. [ 14] studied effects
of varied frame timing on quality of experience in 3 real games, as
measured by mean observer score. Instead they relied on a (set of)
CPU-based, infinite Fibonacci number counter(s), running in the
background, to artificially create uncontrolled variations in frame
times. They find that a 95% frame rate floor predicts quality of expe-
rience across three games. None of these studies carefully control
the sequence, nor the distribution of frame times experienced by
the user. Additionally, they neglected to study any refresh rates
above 120 Hz. We hope our study will fill in some gaps in the cur-
rent understanding of the effects of VRR on human perception and
performance.
2.3 Motion Artifacts define perceptual smoothness
To this point, we have alluded to the psychological construct of per-
ceptual smoothness and tangentially related it to the motion artifact,
motion blur in the introduction. Prior work has done a fine job of
operationally defining perceptual smoothness, concerning object
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
Influence of Variable Frame Timing • 3
motion, by binning it into various distinct visual percepts: false
edges, motion blur, and judder [6]. The perception of smoothness
comes down to how well people detect (i.e., the visibility of) motion
artifacts on displays with different frame rates. For example, using
the visual thresholds of spatio-temporally varying contrast patterns,
one can construct a visibility filter in the frequency domain called
the window of visibility [27, 29]. This work was motivated by the
fact that the discretization of visual information in the real world
adds aliases. These aliases are characterized by the spatio-temporal
sampling rate (e.g., spatial resolution of display pixels or frame rate
of displays) and by the modulation pattern of the sampled signals
(e.g., pixel fill factor or the hold time of display pixels). If the win-
dow of visibility does not filter out these aliases, the visual system
perceives motion artifacts because such aliases are not expected in
naturally arising visual inputs. The theory of window of visibility
has been experimentally measured and verified for displays with
constant frame rates [ 8, 11, 28] and it provides a comprehensive
model of highly controlled laboratory stimuli.
Our work does not attempt to define perceptual smoothness in
one way or another (i.e., by the detection of Judder or motion blur)
because the presentation of frames vary on a moment-by-moment
basis, a different phenomenon relative to presenting frames at con-
stant intervals. Instead, in the experiments described below, we
leave it up to the user to define perceptual smoothness. Specifically,
the user interacts with a gaming environment, and we display the
most extreme ends of apparent motion (15 Hz and 360 Hz) to anchor
their visual perception for smoothness of motion.
2.4 First-person Aiming Performance Measures
First-person shooters (FPS) are a popular genre of competitively
played, high-performance games. Typically in FPS games, the player
uses the mouse to control egocentric view rotation and the keyboard
to translate the camera within a scene. We choose to study the FPS
aiming context as it represents an area where high-skill human-
computer interaction intersects high-performance rendering and
corresponding variable frame timing in an impactful way. Specif-
ically, we study the camera rotation aspect of FPS aiming in this
work, disallowing player translation in the scene to avoid additional
confounding factors. By collecting both perceptual and performance-
oriented measures, we investigate how (relatively) small changes in
frame timing impact the user experience in competitive FPS gaming.
Previous work has used various metrics for quantifying FPS aim-
ing performance. Some studies focus on game-specific outcomes tied
to the aggregation of many aiming actions, for example, kills, deaths,
and assists (as well as their resulting ratios) [20]. Others adopt more
traditional HCI metrics of time to completion and accuracy (or hit
rate) of subjects in completing more atomic tasks [26]. Composite
score metrics are often used in experiments with more than one
primary metric, for example, avoiding being damaged while also
damaging targets [4]. We focus on target elimination time as our
metric of interest in this study.
Parameter Value
Display 360 Hz Alienware AW2521H
Resolution 1920× 1080
G-SYNC (VRR) Enabled
VSync Disabled
Viewing Distance ∼70 cm
CPU Intel i7-9700k @ 3.60 GHz
GPU NVIDIA RTX 2080Ti
RAM 32GB DDR4
Mouse Logitech G Pro Wireless
Mouse DPI 800
Keyboard Logitech G Pro YU0039
Click-to-Photon Latency 20 ms @ 120 Hz (Sec. 5.2)
Table 1. Hardware specifications for the systems used in our experiments.
3 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
We conducted two experiments using systems with similar hardware
specifications (see Table 1) and a shared, open-source software exper-
imentation platform, First Person Science [2, 23] (release v22.05.01),
to run and collect data from users. First Person Science provides a
feature whereby an experimenter can specify a target frame time to
be used on a per-frame basis. We use this virtual sandbox to study
the effects of variable frame timing on the user.
In the subsections below, we describe how we generated variable
frame time sequences and provide detailed descriptions of the two
experiments that focus on the effects of variable frame timing on
perception and performance. The first experiment is concerned with
the visual perception of smoothness of motion for sphere-shaped tar-
gets in a first-person targeting task. The second experiment builds
on the first by selecting subsets of equally smooth (as measured
by experiment one) frame time sequences and comparing perfor-
mance across those groupings. Lastly, we include a description of
the participants in each user study.
Based on our understanding of the impacts of frame time and its
variation from prior art and pilot studies in FPS aiming, we expect
that:
(1) Players can perceive 4-12 ms variations in frame time, across
a range of base frame rates (30-240 Hz)
(2) Players incur additional performance impacts in FPS targeting
under perceptually equivalent VFT conditions
We base these hypotheses on prior studies indicating that changes
in frame time are highly perceptible. Furthermore, we suspect that
VFT will have additional performance impacts as prior art had found
VRR techniques such as G-SYNC improved player performance even
when the change was not perceived [30].
3.1 Variable Frame Time Approach
Across our experimental conditions, subjects experienced a range
of constant and variable frame time sequences over which they
ranked smoothness and attempted to complete targeting tasks as
quickly as possible. In deciding which type of variable frame timing
(VFT) scheme to use, we had many different candidates. Initially,
we considered a "1:N stutter" scheme where a series of N frames
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
4 • Klein et al.
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Time [s]
8
9
10
11
12Frame Time [ms]
A
T
1
80  CFT
Time
1
120  CFT
3 Hz Sine
Fig. 2. Two periods of an example 3 Hz sine wave of varying frame time
over time with 2 ms amplitude (A), 333.33 ms period (T), and time-weighted
mean frame time (𝜇Time = 10.42 ms). Note that the scatter points (and their
relative order over time) overlaid on the waveform are the frame times
users experience when participating in the task. The dashed red/blue lines
indicate the minimum and maximum frame duration denoted( 1
120, 1
80) (see
the supplement for more details).
occur at constant frame timing, followed by a single (or small set
of) frames(s) that is (are) longer/shorter. This model creates a rapid
change in frame timing that emulates a single performance hitch
or unpredictable rendering which are common in real games. How-
ever, this approach is not desirable for the purpose of this study, in
particular for experiment 2, because participants may accomplish
the task in a time window adjacent to where the stutter occurs and
thus the VFT scheme would not impact performance.
We elected to use a sine wave sampling scheme of frame time over
time to produce our VFT sequences. The signal had a frequency of
3 Hz, and the waveform spanned between pairs of CFTs also tested.
We chose a sine wave of this frequency because it gives a smoothly
varying VFT over time. 3 Hz is slow enough that the waveform
will have enough samples with frame times as high as 33.3 ms and
fast enough that a player will experience at least one full waveform
within an expected task completion time of over 500 ms 2. Fig. 2
plots two periods of an example waveform and shows an example
of how a thoughtful sampling of the intended signal is required
to avoid pitfalls. The supplemental video visualizes this approach
using lower frame times (<30 Hz) and a lower VFT sine wave period
(1 Hz), to make the effects more clearly visible on common displays.
3.2 Experiment 1: Perceptual Smoothness
The high-level flow of experiment 1 is summarized in the left-most
portion of Fig. 3. Participants were instructed to rate the smoothness
of the gameplay on a scale of 1-7 as they performed a secondary
first-person targeting task. This task required participants to destroy
as many moving targets on screen as possible in the allotted time.
To destroy a target, a participant aligns a reticle (crosshair) over
a moving target and clicks once. Following a valid mouse click,
the target is destroyed and automatically respawns at a random
2A pilot study considering a few different frequencies showed minor differences in
perception.Thus we selected only a single frequency.
location in the scene. Four targets were presented simultaneously
and moved in random directions across the screen. Participants
could not translate (move) their camera within the 3D scene but
could rotate the view direction by moving the mouse, reproducing
aiming controls typical of FPS gaming.
3.2.1 Trial flow. Each trial began with a red reference target cen-
tered on the screen, with the reticle’s default position set to the
center of this target. A message was overlaid on-screen stating:
“Click the red target to begin. ” When participants were ready to be-
gin a trial, they clicked on the reference target. Afterward, four green
targets appeared on the screen. The targets moved randomly within
a predefined region in world-space coordinates for four seconds.
We instructed participants to try their best to destroy the targets in
each trial and warned them that their data would be discarded if the
number of targets destroyed did not meet an unspecified threshold.
We kept this threshold vague to ensure that participants focused
on the judgment of smoothness while simultaneously doing the
secondary task of destroying the targets. We decided to have the
targets respawn infinitely to ensure that participants experienced
the complete sequence of frame times before making a perceptual
judgment.
After four seconds of gameplay elapsed, a rating screen appeared.
Participants indicated their perception of smoothness on a Likert
scale ranging from 1-7, with 1 mapping to the least smooth per-
ceptual experience and 7 mapping to the smoothest perceptual
experience. Participants marked their responses by pressing the
appropriate number key on the keyboard. To end the trial, a dy-
namic visual noise mask (run as a 2D shader) [1] would appear on
the screen for half a second. We added the mask in an attempt to
remove any carryover effects or motion adaption from the previous
trial. This flow is summarized visually on the left side of Fig. 3.
Before the experiment started, participants were allowed to ad-
just their mouse sensitivity to their desired setting. The mouse
sensitivity adjustment task was similar in design to the description
above, except it ended once all 4 targets were destroyed with no time
limit. Afterward, participants were provided task instructions and
practice trials to get comfortable with the experiment design. The
instructions consisted of two separate trials. The first trial lasted
ten seconds instead of four, with the game rendered at 15 Hz. Par-
ticipants were instructed to pay attention to the smoothness of the
gameplay, as this visual experience represented a smoothness rating
of 1. Next, they experienced a trial at 360 Hz for ten seconds and
were told that this visual experience mapped to a smoothness rating
of 7. As a note, we did not include 15 Hz or 360 Hz frame rates in
the actual experiment. After being introduced to the rating scale,
participants experienced five warm-up trials lasting four seconds
each. The warm-up trials consisted of variable frame time sequences
and constant frame time sequences and were designed to introduce
the user to the primary task of the experiment.
3.2.2 Stimuli. We utilized four instances of a single type of target
in each trial. The target was green and had a world-space diameter
of 0.5 m. Note that we did not calculate degrees of visual angle
subtended by the target on the retina as we did not use a chin rest
to control for viewing distance. Additionally, the apparent size of
the target changed slightly on-screen as it moved due to perspective
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
Influence of Variable Frame Timing • 5
Fig. 3. Trial flow for experiment 1 (left) and experiment 2 (right). In experiment 1, only one weapon type results in a single flow. Note that the visual noise
mask is presented in the final stage of the experiment 1 flow. In experiment 2, participants utilized two weapon types, and the damage sequence is depicted
across frames of two trials.
projection. The target moved at a constant world-space speed of
3 m/sec. At some point, the target changed direction every 700-
1000 ms (uniformly sampled), with the new direction also sampled
uniformly from all possible directions. The targets spawned in a 0.5
x 2 x 2 m box centered 7.5 m away from the player spawn position.
Those targets moved within a larger 1 x 2.3 x 6 m box centered on
the same position as the spawn bounding box.
We utilized a red circle for the reticle. Participants could adjust
their mouse sensitivity to their desired setting (in◦/mm), and the
mouse DPI was set to 800.
3.2.3 Conditions. Experiment 1 employed four conditions, one con-
stant frame time and three variable frame time conditions that dif-
fered in amplitude (see Section 3.1 above). The constant frame time
condition was comprised of eight levels. From the longest frame du-
ration to the shortest, we included: 1/30, 1/34, 1/40, 1/48, 1/60, 1/80,
1/120, and 1/240 s. We selected these frame duration levels based
on two factors. First, we wanted to adequately sample the domain
of monitor refresh rates available in the wild. Older displays and
TV content update at 30 Hz refresh rates, while new monitors can
run up to 360 Hz, but we only tested up to 240 Hz as this is what is
widely available in the gaming market. Second, the VFT conditions,
using a sinusoidal variation, were composed of frame sequences
that oscillated periodically between two frame times; for example,
between 1/240 s and 1/120 s. Because the user is experiencing (at
most) a frame time equivalent to a 120 Hz frame rate, we wanted to
include that constant frame rate in our experiment design.
The three VFT conditions sampled the same domain of frame
times as the constant frame time condition but differed from one
another in the amplitude (A) of the sine wave used to generate the
sequence of frame times. The amplitude and the min and max frame
duration from both the constant and variable frame time conditions
are provided in Table 2.
In total, there were 26 levels across the four conditions. Par-
ticipants encountered each of the 26 levels 11 times totaling 286
trials. To account for order or carryover effects, we presented the
26 levels in random order within a single block (of 26 trials). Par-
ticipants, therefore, encountered 11 blocks of 26 trials so that no
block contained two trials of the same level. This experiment took
approximately 1 hour to complete.
3.2.4 Participants. A total of 10 participants completed experiment
1. However, one participant’s data were excluded from analysis
because their responses were overly noisy (i.e., the standard error
of the mean for their response at each level was 2-3× as large as
the other participants). All participants signed an informed consent
form approved by the IRB (Protocol #00059738).
3.3 Experiment 2: Targeting Performance
Experiment 2 was a performance-based task focused on the effect of
variable frame timing while controlling for perceptual smoothness
(based on experiment 1 results) on destroying a single target with
two weapon configurations: 2-hit and Autofire. The first weapon
configuration was a 2-hit weapon that required participants to click
twice on the target to destroy it. The second weapon configuration
was set to Autofire, which required a single mouse click followed
by a hold to fire repeatedly (15 shots/s).
Our selection of constant and variable frame time sequences was
based on the perceptual results from experiment 1. Specifically, we
paired VFT sequences and constant frame time sequences that were
perceived as equally smooth in experiment 1. With this framework
in mind, we can assess whether the VFT sequences impact targeting
performance relative to a constant frame time sequence despite
being perceived as equally smooth.
3.3.1 Trial flow. A trial in experiment 2 was similar in structure
to a trial in experiment 1 but with a few important differences.
First, a single green target appeared on screen as opposed to four.
Second, the participants were instructed to destroy the target as
quickly as possible within five seconds to complete the task. The trial
would end if either five seconds passed or the target was destroyed,
whichever came first. At the end of the trial, a message would appear
stating either, “Target destroyed!” or “Target not destroyed. ” The
subsequent trial would begin with the following message, “Click
the red target to begin. ”
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
6 • Klein et al.
Amplitude Count Frame Duration (min, max) [s]
0 ms (constant) 8 1
240 , 1
120 , 1
80 , 1
60 , 1
48 , 1
40 , 1
34 , 1
30
2 ms 7 ( 1
240 , 1
120 ), ( 1
120 , 1
80 ), ( 1
80 , 1
60 ), ( 1
60 , 1
48 ), ( 1
48 , 1
40 ), ( 1
40 , 1
34 ), ( 1
34 , 1
30 )
4 ms 6 ( 1
240 , 1
80 ), ( 1
120 , 1
60 ), ( 1
80 , 1
48 ), ( 1
60 , 1
40 ), ( 1
47 , 1
34 ), ( 1
40 , 1
30 )
6 ms 5 ( 1
240 , 1
60 ), ( 1
120 , 1
48 ), ( 1
80 , 1
40 ), ( 1
60 , 1
34 ), ( 1
48 , 1
30 )
Table 2. Experiment 1 conditions are ordered by the amplitude of frame time variation. Constant (0 ms) conditions, with equal minimum and maximum
frame duration, are represented by a single number instead of a pair. All frame duration is presented as fractions in seconds. The count column represents the
number of levels tested in each of the four conditions.
Fig. 4. (Left) Visualization of the experiment 2 spawn regions centered on
the initial player aim direction. The top (cyan) and bottom (red) regions
were 0.5 x 0.2 x 2.6 m and the left (yellow) and right (magenta) regions were
0.5 x 1.8 x 0.2 m. An equal number of targets spawned in each region within
each condition. The reticle was drawn in red at the center of the screen.
(Right) Different colored reticles used for the 2-hit (black) and track (blue)
weapon configurations.
3.3.2 Stimuli. Participants were instructed to track and destroy a
single green target. The target was 0.25 m in diameter and moved
at a constant speed of 2 m/s. The target utilized the same direction
change algorithm as experiment 1 with an equal motion change
time range of 700-1000 ms. Given that this task was performance-
based, we wanted to avoid the worst possible edge case (and similar
cases) where the target spawns, by chance, directly over the player
reticle, as this would unduly influence task performance. Therefore,
we created four different rectangular spawn regions that comprise
the perimeter of the bounding box of target motion. These regions
are visualized in Fig. 4. The top and bottom regions were 0.5 x 0.2
x 2.6 m and the side regions were 0.5 x 1.8 x 0.2 m. The target
movement bounds were the same as in experiment 1 (a 1 x 2.3 x 6 m
box centered 7.5 m away from the user and completely containing
the spawn bounds).
When the 2-hit weapon configuration was selected, the reticle
was drawn in black, and when the Autofire weapon was used, the
reticle was drawn in blue, as shown on the right side of Fig. 4, with
the intent to inform the player which weapon was active. The 2-hit
weapon fired at 4 Hz and required two shots on target to destroy.
Each shot was followed by a cooldown period, indicated by a ring
that appeared on the screen surrounding the reticle. It changed color
from blue to yellow during the cooldown, and once it disappeared,
participants could fire the weapon again, as shown in Fig. 3 right.
The Autofire weapon fired 15 shots/s and required 10 hits to destroy
the target. Neither weapon supported a reload action, and both had
infinite ammunition. Lastly, participants could adjust their mouse
sensitivity to their liking (in◦/mm), and the mouse DPI was fixed
to 800.
3.3.3 Experiment conditions. In this experiment, we employed three
constant frame time levels and five variable frame time levels from
experiment 1. Based on the perceptual results from experiment 1
(Sec. 4.1), we grouped constant frame time sequences with VFT
sequences that were, on average, perceived as equally smooth. The
first pairing contained a constant frame time sequence at 1/120 s
and a VFT sequence that oscillated between 1/240 and 1/80 s (A = 4
ms). The second grouping contained the constant frame duration
of 1/60 seconds and three VFT sequences: 1) 1/120 to 1/48 (A = 6
ms), 1/80 to 1/48 (A = 4 ms), and 1/60 to 1/48 (A = 2 ms). The last
pairing considered the constant frame time sequence of 34 Hz and
the VFT sequence oscillating between 1/40 to 1/30 seconds (A = 4ms).
Together, these groupings constitute 3 conditions for experiment
2. For each of the variable and constant frame time sequences in
the 3 conditions, participants completed the task with the 2-hit and
Autofire weapon configurations. There were 16 unique frame time-
by-weapon configuration combinations across the three conditions.
We utilized a blocked design where participants completed all
trials for one frame time sequence by weapon configuration com-
bination (e.g., 1/60 s constant frame time sequence with the 2-hit
weapon) before moving on to the next block of trials. Within a given
block, participants completed 5 mini-blocks. Each mini-block con-
tained eight trials, 2 trials for each of the four target spawn regions
(left, right, top and bottom). We discarded the first mini-block as
training from the initial 40 trials. We analyze 32 trials per block
totalling 640 trials per subject in just over an hour.
To account for order effects, we controlled the sequence of blocks
participants encountered throughout the experiment. First, we took
all permutations of the three conditions (6) and randomly shuffled
the ordering of the constant and variable frame time blocks within
each of the conditions. Then for each permutation, we created a
sequence of blocks where the odd-numbered blocks (i.e., blocks 1,
3, . . . , 15) used the 2-hit weapon, and the even-numbered blocks
used the Autofire weapon. We also include a separate order where
participants utilized the Autofire weapon on all the odd-numbered
blocks and the 2-hit on the even-numbered blocks. Together, this
amounted to 12 orderings of blocks.
3.3.4 Participants. A total of 15 participants completed experiment
2. All participants signed an informed consent form that was ap-
proved by the IRB (Protocol #00059738).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
Influence of Variable Frame Timing • 7
5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0
2
3
4
5
6SmoothnessSmoothnessSmoothnessSmoothnessSmoothnessSmoothnessSmoothnessSmoothness
CFT (A = 0 ms)
1
240
1
120
1
80
1
60
1
48
1
40
1
34
1
30
Sigmoid Fit (CFT)
5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0
Frame duration [ms]Frame duration [ms]Frame duration [ms]Frame duration [ms]
VFT (A = 2 ms)
( 1
240 , 1
120 )
( 1
120 , 1
80 )
( 1
80 , 1
60 )
( 1
60 , 1
48 )
( 1
48 , 1
40 )
( 1
40 , 1
34 )
( 1
34 , 1
30 )
Sigmoid Fit (CFT)
5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0
VFT (A = 4 ms)
( 1
240 , 1
80 )
( 1
120 , 1
60 )
( 1
80 , 1
48 )
( 1
60 , 1
40 )
( 1
47 , 1
34 )
( 1
40 , 1
30 )
Sigmoid Fit (CFT)
5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0
VFT (A = 6 ms)
( 1
240 , 1
60 )
( 1
120 , 1
48 )
( 1
80 , 1
40 )
( 1
60 , 1
34 )
( 1
48 , 1
30 )
Sigmoid Fit (CFT)
Fig. 5. Perception of smoothness plotted as a function of time-weighted mean frame duration for each of the four conditions tested in experiment 1. Participants
utilized a rating scale from 1 (low) to 7 (high) to indicate their perception of smoothness during gameplay. (Left) Mean smoothness ratings across subjects for
each of the eight frame duration levels tested in the constant frame time condition. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. A sigmoid function
(see Equation 1) is fit to the pooled participant smoothness scores for constant frame rates and is superimposed over all plots in the figure (green lines). We
computed MSE as a measure of goodness of fit, and red dotted lines depict prediction errors of the fit with respect to observed data. (From middle left to right)
2/4/6 ms amplitude VFT condition: smoothness scores for each of the levels presented to participants are plotted against the time-weighted mean frame
duration of each VFT sequence (i.e., the x-coordinate where vertical error bars intersect the horizontal lines).
4 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
4.1 Experiment 1-Perception
When comparing the frame time sequences (levels) within the same
condition, perceived smoothness monotonically decreased as frame
duration increased. This relationship held across all four conditions
tested in experiment 1 and is shown in Fig. 5 where perceived
smoothness is plotted against time-weighted mean frame duration
(the x-coordinate where vertical error bars project out in the right
three panels). This shows that the findings from prior work [ 6]
continue to hold even when frame time varies. The smoothness
rating changed almost linearly as the time-weighted mean frame
duration increased, with the slope being slightly less steep at the
short frame times. It seems that meaningfully different smoothness
existed across the tested range of frame times. Additionally, our
reference stimuli effectively anchored the perceived smoothness at
15 and 360 Hz to the smoothness ratings of 1 and 7, respectively.
To examine the effect of frame time variation, we fit a sigmoid
function to the observed data in the CFT condition (leftmost panel
in Fig. 5) using a least-square criterion,
𝑓𝛼,𝑥 0,𝛽,𝐶(𝑥) = 𝛽
1+𝑒−𝛼(𝑥−𝑥0)+𝐶 (1)
yielding the following fit parameters: 𝛼 = −116.983, 𝛽 = 7.63,
𝑥0 = 0.0306,𝐶 =−1.091 with a mean squared error (MSE) of 0.0458.
We then overlaid the fitted sigmoid curve on the VFT sequences
comprising the other three conditions, as depicted by the green
curve re-plotted over the observed data in each of the right three
panels of Fig. 5. For each VFT sequence (horizontal lines in Fig. 5),
one can visually search for the CFT yielding equivalent predicted
smoothness by finding the point on the green curve with an equal
smoothness rating3. In other words, we identify where the green
curve intersects the horizontal line. This equivalently smooth CFT
tends to be closer to the longest frame duration in the given VFT
sequence (the right edge of the horizontal line) than the shortest
frame duration in the sequence (the left edge of the same line).
In applying the same logic from the above analysis to each of the
three VFT conditions, we found that the amplitude of frame time
variation had a systematic effect on the equivalently smooth CFT
(Fig. 6). When the amplitude of frame time variation was small (2
ms), the equivalently smooth CFT was not strongly biased toward
the longer frame time in the VFT condition. Additionally, it tended to
cluster around the time-weighted mean frame duration of each VFT
sequence. When the amplitude of frame time variation was large (6
ms), the equivalently smooth CFT became strongly biased toward
the longer frame time in the VFT sequence (Fig. 6 left). We can
conceptualize this bias another way by considering the equivalently
smooth CFT as a percentile for the distribution of frame times in
the VFT sequence under consideration, as exemplified in the inset
plot of Fig. 6 for the sequence (1/48, 1/30).
After converting the equivalently smooth CFT to a percentile rank
for each VFT sequence in a particular condition, we see that there
is a lower variance around a higher mean percentile rank in the 6
ms condition relative to the 4 ms and 2ms conditions (Fig. 7, right).
However, when we consider the equivalently smooth CFTs, this
relationship across VFT condition disappears as shown in Fig. 7, left.
The analysis demonstrates that the perceived smoothness in VFT
becomes dominated by the visual stimulation from longer frames,
and the bias is stronger and more consistent when the amplitude of
the variation is wider.
3The green curve interested all VFT sequences except for the (1/240-1/120s) level. We
exclude this data point from analysis but revisit it in the discussion.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
8 • Klein et al.
Freq.
Frame duration [ms]
Fig. 6. Perception of smoothness in the 6 ms VFT condition (A = 6 ms). (Left) The sigmoid fit to the constant frame duration data (green curve) is overlaid on
top of horizontal bars representing the range of frame times for each of the five levels in the A = 6 ms VFT condition. Horizontal dashed-red lines extend
from the time-weighted mean frame duration of each VFT sequence to the intersection point of the green curve and the horizontal lines. We consider these
intersection points as equivalently smooth CFTs for corresponding VFT sequences. The inset figure to the right depicts the frequency distribution of frame
times in the VFT sequence oscillating between (1/48, 1/30) frame times. Vertical bars overlaid on the distribution highlight the 25th, median (50th), and
75th percentiles and the time-weighted mean frame duration. Additionally, the last vertical bar highlights the percentile rank of the frequency distribution
corresponding to the equivalently smooth CFT.
Condition MSE Weighted Mean MSE Percentile Reduction in MSE
2 ms 0.0351 0.0334 5%
4 ms 0.0532 0.0537 -0.95%
6 ms 0.0053 0.0043 19.7%
Table 3. Comparison of sigmoid MSE for time-weighted mean and percentile-based fits. Note that comparisons should occur within conditions, not across
them, as the number of points fit by the 4-parameter sigmoid (see Eq. 1) was different between conditions.
2 4 6
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0Equivalent CFT [ms]
2 4 6
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%Percentile
VFT Ampltide [ms]
Fig. 7. (Left) The scatter plot demonstrates a poor correlation between VFT
amplitude and the smooth CFT metric. (Right) Improved positive correlation
of VFT amplitude when equivalently smooth CFT is converted to a percentile
rank for the distribution of frames in its respective VFT sequence. Note that
the colors of scatter points map directly to the colors in the legend of 5.
To confirm this, we fit two sigmoids for each amplitude condition.
The first sigmoid was fit on the time-weighted mean frame duration
of each VFT sequence, and the second one was fit on the mean
percentile of the scatter points in Fig. 7 (right). Overall, we observe
more accurate fits when using the mean percentile instead of the
time-weighed mean of the frame time series (Table 3). This indicates
that, particularly for larger frame time variations, using a model
based on a fixed (high) percentile of frame times better predicts
perceived smoothness than time-weighted mean frame time.
4.2 Experiment 2-Performance
4.2.1 Figures of merit and Analysis. We looked at time to completion
to evaluate the effect of variable frame timing on performance. As
a baseline check, we also looked at the average number of trials
with the target destroyed per VFT or CFT sequence. The task, by
design, was easy to accomplish, so the proportion of trials in which
the target was successfully destroyed served as a measure to rule
out outliers. We chose a threshold of 75% of trials with the target
destroyed to rule out outliers. Two participants did not meet this
threshold and were excluded from the statistical analysis, leaving 15
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
Influence of Variable Frame Timing • 9
participants. Our primary focus was to assess the time to complete
the task. We reasoned that if VFT were to affect performance, then
this would be reflected as slower completion times for trials with
varying frame times relative to trials with constant frame times.
For time to complete the task, we coupled two statistical analyses
to assess different but related hypotheses. First, we conducted a
three-way repeated measure ANOVA (2 weapon configurations×
3 smoothness levels× 2 frame timing regimes ) to determine if there
was an interaction between perceptual smoothness, weapon config-
uration, and VFT on time to destroy the target.We employed a fully
crossed design where our focal, or moderating, variable was weapon
configuration. We hypothesized that the effect of weapon type on
time to completion would depend on both the smoothness of the
gaming experience and whether the frame duration was varying or
constant. The smoothness variable was comprised of three levels
based on the findings from experiment 1: low smoothness (1/34 s,
and (1/40 s-1/30 s)), average smoothness (1/60 s, and (1/80 s-1/48 s)),
and high smoothness (1/120 s, and (1/240 s-1/80 s)). Note that each
variable frame time sequence has an amplitude of 4 ms, so the only
factors changing are the sequence’s minimum and maximum frame
duration, which are directly related to the smoothness experience.
The variable frame time factor has two levels: constant frame time
(1/34 s, 1/60 s, and 1/120 s) and variable frame time ((1/40 s-1/30
s), (1/80 s-1/48 s), and (1/240 s-1/80 s)). The last factor, weapon
configuration, has two levels: 2-hit and Autofire.
Our second analysis focused on how the sine wave’s amplitude
influenced performance. We conditioned our analysis on a single
smoothness score and investigated the interaction between weapon
configuration and amplitude of the sine wave. The first factor, am-
plitude of the sine wave, consisted of 4 levels: 1/60 s (A = 0 ms), 1/60
s-1/48 s (A = 2 ms), 1/80 s-1/48 s (A = 4 ms), 1/120 s-1/48 s (A = 6
ms). The second factor, weapon configuration, maintained the same
two levels as the previous analysis. In short, we ran a fully crossed
two-way repeated measure ANOVA (2 weapon configurations× 4
amplitudes).
Statistically significant main effects in both analyses were fol-
lowed up with multiple paired-sample t-tests with Bonferroni ad-
justments made at an alpha level of 0.05. Specifically, the p-values
reported in the experiment 2 results section are adjusted using a
Bonferroni correction. We also wrangled the data for each partici-
pant to conform to the assumptions of the ANOVA test. First, we
filtered out the data from each block’s first mini-block (8 trials) to
focus on steady-state performance and exclude outliers that may
have resulted from adapting to the task. Afterward, we computed
the mean time to complete the task with the remaining 32 trials
(although some means were based on smaller sample sizes if par-
ticipants did not complete the task on a particular trial). We then
applied a natural log transformation (base𝑒) to the mean value ob-
tained for each observer to ensure that the residuals were normally
distributed. Note that we report the descriptive statistics (in both our
figures and text) in the original units despite running the analyses
on the transformed data for ease of interpretation (i.e., equal length
standard error whiskers around means on bar charts).
4.2.2 Time to completion. The mean time to destroy the target
provides us with an overall measure quantifying the impact of vari-
able frame timing on performance in experiment 2. We observed a
significant three-way interaction between weapon configuration,
smoothness and variable frame timing, F(2, 28) = 3.490, p = 0.044,
𝜂2𝑝 = 0.2. We observed no significant two-way interaction between
smoothness and variable frame timing for the Autofire weapon (F(2,
28) = 2.11, p = 0.141,𝜂2𝑝 = 0.131), nor a significant main effect for
variable frame timing (F(1, 14) = 0.412, p = 0.531, 𝜂2𝑝 = 0.029), but
we did observe a main effect for smoothness (F(2, 28) = 6.28, p =
0.006,𝜂2𝑝 = 0.31), as shown in Fig. 8, left. Post-hoc analysis between
the different levels of smoothness indicated that low smoothness
trials took significantly longer to complete (M=2.44 s, SEM=0.104)
relative to high smoothness (M=2.28 s, SEM=0.097), t(14) = 3.21, p
= 0.006; and average smoothness (M=2.32 s, SEM=0.114), t(14) =
3.01, p = 0.009. However, we did not observe a significant difference
in time to completion between the medium and high smoothness
levels, t(14) = -0.624, p = 0.542.
For the 2-hit weapon configuration, we observed no significant
interaction between smoothness and VFT (F(2, 28) = 1.28, p = 0.293,
𝜂2𝑝 = 0.084) nor a significant main effect for VFT (F(1, 14) = 0.3, p
= 0.593,𝜂2𝑝 = 0.021). The main effect of smoothness for the 2-hit
weapon was significant at an uncorrected alpha level of 0.05, F(2,
28) = 3.87, p = 0.033,𝜂2𝑝 = 0.216, but did not survive a Bonferroni
corrected alpha level for the 4 main effects investigated here (alpha
= 0.0125). Therefore, we did not examine pairwise comparisons
between smoothness levels for the 2-hit weapon.
Our second analysis, which focused on the interaction between
the amplitude of the sine wave and weapon configuration condi-
tioned on medium perceptual smoothness, revealed no significant
two-way interaction between weapon configuration and amplitude
of sine wave, F(3,42) = 2.145, p = 0.109,𝜂2𝑝 = 0.133. We also did not
find a significant main effect for amplitude of the sine wave, F(3, 42)
= 0.669, p = 0.576,𝜂2𝑝 = 0.046 but we observed a significant main ef-
fect for weapon configuration, F(1,14) = 47.148, p < 0.001,𝜂2𝑝 = 0.771
(Fig. 8, right). Utilization of the 2-hit weapon led to significantly
faster task completion time (M=1.94 s, SEM=0.109) relative to the
Autofire weapon (M=2.31 s, SEM=0.108).
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 Summary of Results
In this study, we investigated how VFT influences users’ perception
of smoothness (experiment 1) and their performance in FPS-style
gameplay (experiment 2). Our analysis of the results from experi-
ment 1 suggests that VFT impacts our perception of smoothness
similarly to CFT (Fig. 5). Moreover, as more variation is added to a
constant frame time baseline (i.e., larger amplitude), our perception
of smoothness becomes tethered to the frames presented on screen
for longer periods of time (e.g., the sampled frames near the peak
of the sine wave in Fig. 2). This is realized by our MSE analysis
(table 3) in the VFT conditions that found higher percentiles of the
frequency distributions for each VFT sequence served as better pre-
dictors of smoothness than the time-weighted mean frame duration.
For example, we saw a 20% reduction in MSE when we regressed
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
10 • Klein et al.
AutoFire 2-Hit
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
 *
*
Completion Time [s]
Perceptual
smoothness
Low
Medium
High
AutoFire 2-Hit
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
 *
Fig. 8. Time to destroy the target. (Left) Box plots with individual data points per subject (n = 15) superimposed on top. The task completion time is stratified
by weapon type and perceptual smoothness. (Right) The task completion time is stratified by weapon type only. Horizontal black bars with the * symbol
indicate statistically significant comparisons.
the smoothness scores of participants in the A = 6 ms condition
on the frame duration corresponding to the 70th percentile of each
of the five VFT sequences as opposed to the time-weighted mean
frame duration. However, it should be noted that we fit four free
parameters of the sigmoid function to (essentially) five data points
(the means smoothness scores across all participants for the VFT
sequences). So some overfitting is to be expected. Other models (e.g.,
simple linear regression) may better predict the smoothness in the
VFT sequences with considerable variation in frame timing, espe-
cially when the VFT sequence oscillates between 1/240 and 1/120 s
because it did not intersect the green curve in Fig. 5. However, this
does not preclude our conclusion that frames persisting on screen
for the longest period of time in the VFT sequences have a more
pronounced influence on the perception of smoothness in gameplay
than the frames near the time-weighted mean frame duration of the
VFT sequence.
The results from experiment 2 demonstrated that variable frame
timing did not significantly impact task completion. However, per-
ception of smoothness and the weapon type did account for the
variability in task performance. Participants took longer to destroy
targets with the Autofire weapon in the low smoothness condition
relative to the average and high smoothness conditions; however,
we did not find the same pattern of results with the 2-hit weapon
(Fig. 8 left). Our second analysis on the effect of the sine wave am-
plitude, conditioned on average perceptual smoothness, showed no
additional interesting effects of VFT and reconfirmed the influence
of weapon configuration on completion time. Taken together, these
analyses reject our hypothesis that performance is impacted beyond
perceivable changes in VFT. While frames that last on screen for
long periods of time (e.g., 1/30 s) do create significant impacts on
task completion time relative to frames that last on screen for short
periods of time (e.g., 1/120 s), they do not appear to drive changes
in performance amongst CFT and VFT sequences ranked as equally
smooth (on average) by users.
1/120
(1/240, 1/80)(1/120, 1/48)
1/60
(1/80, 1/48)(1/60, 1/48)
1/34
(1/40, 1/30)
Frame Time [s]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Click-to-Photon [ms]
Fig. 9. Distribution of click-to-photon latency (measured based on 200 clicks)
across the stimuli levels selected for high, mid, and low smoothness for
experiment 2 (performance). Horizontal lines indicate median, box bounds
upper and lower quartile, and whiskers indicate min and max, excluding
outliers. Frame times are sorted by measured latency. Measurements were
collected using a click-to-photon tool similar to [7, 19]. Latency may partially
explain differences in aiming time (Sec. 5.2).
5.2 Latency Effects
Prior work has demonstrated that end-to-end latency affects FPS
aiming task performance [9, 13, 22] with changes as small as 8 ms
showing measurable differences [24]. Frame time contributes to the
latency of a system, with the expected latency linearly proportional
to frame duration. In our experiment, we chose not to attempt to
normalize latency across frame time conditions as there was no
obvious method for controlling latency during dynamic frame time
stimuli. As a result, different VFT levels result in different mean and
range of latencies, as seen in Fig. 9. The difference in average latency
between the 120 Hz and the 34 Hz constant frame rate conditions was
∼10 ms. Though this likely impacted performance results between
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
Influence of Variable Frame Timing • 11
the high, mid, and low frame rate conditions, the impact based on the
difference in latency between grouped conditions (i.e., 120 Hz fixed
vs. (1/240, 1/80) VFT) is likely small. Future studies on the impacts
of VFT on latency and variable latency on performance would be
interesting next steps in better understanding these impacts. We
accept that the change in latency across conditions may cause some
portion of the measured change in performance in our experiments.
5.3 Suggestions for Researchers
Researchers studying frame rate or time as an independent vari-
able in perceptual contexts should carefully consider the effects of
variation over time. Systems used to conduct experiments should
have appropriate hardware specifications to guarantee they meet
or exceed the desired frame rate and potentially inject additional
delay to regularize frame times to as close to constant as possible.
When reporting frame times as a single period, or frame rate, inves-
tigators should report variational statistics demonstrating how well
controlled their constant frame rate/time was. When frame rates
or times are not sufficiently well controlled, we have demonstrated
that they significantly affect the perception of smoothness, with
the mean frame time mispredicting the equivalent perception of a
constant frame time condition.
We did not observe evidence that, beyond perceptually equivalent
conditions, our choice of variable frame timing stimuli impacts FPS
aiming task performance. However, this does not imply that variable
frame timing cannot impact task performance. Specifically, we mea-
sured a relatively small frame time variation at typical, lower-end
refresh rates. More considerable variations in frame time, such as the
doubling of frames introduced by VSync, could more significantly
impact performance through variable frame timing.
5.4 Suggestions for Gamers
Gamers should be mindful of additional dynamic workloads and
other sources of VFT in their systems. However, unlike other metrics
where performance is often impacted without a perceived differ-
ence, variable frame timing appears to be primarily a perceptual
effect. For this reason, gamers are uniquely well suited to evaluate
the impacts of variable frame timing on their gameplay as the im-
pacts seem primarily perceptual. When VFT becomes bothersome
to gamers, they have several options for improving the regularity of
frame times. Traditional techniques like buffering larger numbers of
frames and enabling VSync can help in some cases, but at the cost
of additional latency and increased VFT in certain non-performant
cases. Alternatively, gamers can use VRR technology or approaches
like in-game frame rate limiters and adjust settings to reduce addi-
tional compute workloads. Here the primary benefit of VRR is that,
unlike more traditional display techniques, it can target constant
frame rates other than traditional display refresh rates without ex-
otic display configuration (i.e., 60, 120, 144, 240 Hz). This allows
the gamer to better tailor their ideal, consistent refresh rate to the
system capabilities by running at 100 Hz instead of duty cycling
between 1/60 s and 1/120 s frames.
6 CONCLUSIONS
This work focused on the influence of Variable Frame Timing (VFT)
on human perception of smoothness and performance in FPS-style
gameplay. It considered a wide range of constant frame time se-
quences from 1/30 to 1/240 s and variable frame time sequences
that oscillated between those typical frame times encountered in
the wild. Across the domain of frame times tested, two user studies
demonstrate that large deviations from the average frame time of the
VFT sequence affect the perception of smoothness while minimally
influencing performance beyond the smoothness effect.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
REFERENCES
[1] ap. 2015. Visual sorbet. https://www.shadertoy.com/view/Xdd3D7
[2] Ben Boudaoud, Josef Spjut, and Joohwan Kim. 2022. FirstPersonScience: An
Open Source Tool for Studying FPS Esports Aiming. In Special Interest Group on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Talks . 1–2.
[3] Ed Callway. 2018. Variable Frame Rate Technology — Change Is Good!. In SMPTE
2018. 1–11. https://doi.org/10.5594/M001823
[4] Kajal T Claypool and Mark Claypool. 2007. On frame rate and player performance
in first person shooter games. Multimedia systems 13, 1 (2007), 3–17.
[5] Mark Claypool, Kajal Claypool, and Feissal Damaa. 2006. The effects of frame
rate and resolution on users playing first person shooter games. In Multimedia
computing and networking 2006 , Vol. 6071. SPIE, 607101.
[6] Gyorgy Denes, Akshay Jindal, Aliaksei Mikhailiuk, and Rafał K. Mantiuk. 2020.
A Perceptual Model of Motion Quality for Rendering with Adaptive Refresh-
Rate and Resolution. ACM Trans. Graph. 39, 4, Article 133 (jul 2020), 17 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3386569.3392411
[7] Federico Dossena and Andrea Trentini. 2022. OpenLDAT—A system for the
measurement of display latency metrics. Journal of the Society for Information
Display (2022).
[8] David M Hoffman, Vasiliy I Karasev, and Martin S Banks. 2011. Temporal pre-
sentation protocols in stereoscopic displays: Flicker visibility, perceived motion,
and perceived depth. Journal of the Society for Information Display 19, 3 (2011),
271–297.
[9] Zenja Ivkovic, Ian Stavness, Carl Gutwin, and Steven Sutcliffe. 2015. Quantifying
and mitigating the negative effects of local latencies on aiming in 3d shooter
games. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual acm conference on human factors in
computing systems. 135–144.
[10] Akshay Jindal, Krzysztof Wolski, Karol Myszkowski, and Rafał K Mantiuk. 2021.
Perceptual model for adaptive local shading and refresh rate. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG) 40, 6 (2021), 1–18.
[11] Paul V Johnson, Joohwan Kim, David M Hoffman, Andy D Vargas, and Martin S
Banks. 2014. Motion artifacts on 240-Hz OLED stereoscopic 3D displays. Journal
of the Society for Information Display 22, 8 (2014), 393–403.
[12] Seung Hoon Ko. 2019. A-24 db in-band noise-immunity mutual capacitance
readout system for variable refresh rate of active-matrix oled display. IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 67, 4 (2019), 1126–1135.
[13] Shengmei Liu, Mark Claypool, Atsuo Kuwahara, Jamie Sherman, and James J
Scovell. 2021. Lower is better? The effects of local latencies on competitive first-
person shooter game players. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems . 1–12.
[14] Shengmei Liu, Atsuo Kuwahara, James J Scovell, and Mark Claypool. 2023. The
Effects of Frame Rate Variation on Game Player Quality of Experience. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
1–10.
[15] Rafał K. Mantiuk and Gyorgy Denes. 2021. Adaptive Refresh Rate and Resolution:
Exploiting the Limitations of Spatio-Temporal Vision. SID Symposium Digest of
Technical Papers 52, 1 (2021), 465–468. https://doi.org/10.1002/sdtp.14718
[16] Christian H Poth, Rebecca M Foerster, Christian Behler, Ulrich Schwanecke,
Werner X Schneider, and Mario Botsch. 2018. Ultrahigh temporal resolution of
visual presentation using gaming monitors and G-Sync.Behavior research methods
50, 1 (2018), 26–38.
[17] Maryam Riahi and Benjamin Allen Watson. 2021. Am I Playing Better Now? The
Effects of G-SYNC in 60Hz Gameplay. Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech. 4,
1, Article 6 (apr 2021), 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3451269
[18] Robert W Rodieck and Robert W Rodieck. 1998. The first steps in seeing . Vol. 1.
Sinauer Associates Sunderland, MA. 158—176 pages.
[19] Andreas Schmid and Raphael Wimmer. 2021. Yet Another Latency Measuring
Device. (2021).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.
12 • Klein et al.
[20] Kyong Jin Shim, Kuo-Wei Hsu, Samarth Damania, Colin DeLong, and Jaideep
Srivastava. 2011. An Exploratory Study of Player and Team Performance in Mul-
tiplayer First-Person-Shooter Games. In 2011 IEEE Third International Conference
on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust and 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on
Social Computing. 617–620. https://doi.org/10.1109/PASSAT/SocialCom.2011.155
[21] Gerrit A Slavenburg, Marcel Janssens, Luis Lucas, Robert Jan Schutten, and Tom
Verbeure. 2020. Variable Refresh Rate Displays. In SID Symposium Digest of
Technical Papers, Vol. 51. Wiley Online Library, 669–672.
[22] Josef Spjut, Ben Boudaoud, Kamran Binaee, Jonghyun Kim, Alexander Majer-
cik, Morgan McGuire, David Luebke, and Joohwan Kim. 2019. Latency of 30
Ms Benefits First Person Targeting Tasks More Than Refresh Rate Above 60
Hz. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2019 Technical Briefs (Brisbane, QLD, Australia) (SA ’19).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 110–113. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3355088.3365170
[23] Josef Spjut, Ben Boudaoud, Kamran Binaee, Alexander Majercik, Morgan McGuire,
and Joohwan Kim. 2019. FirstPersonScience: Quantifying Psychophysics for First
Person Shooter Tasks. In UCI Esports Conference. UCI, Irvine, 7 pages.
[24] Josef Spjut, Ben Boudaoud, and Joohwan Kim. 2021. A Case Study of First Person
Aiming at Low Latency for Esports. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.10498 (2021).
[25] Sylvain Tourancheau, Patrick Le Callet, Kjell Brunnström, and Börje Andrén.
2009. Psychophysical study of LCD motion-blur perception. In Human Vision
and Electronic Imaging XIV , Bernice E. Rogowitz and Thrasyvoulos N. Pappas
(Eds.), Vol. 7240. International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE, 724015.
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.811757
[26] Rodrigo Vicencio-Moreira, Regan L Mandryk, Carl Gutwin, and Scott Bateman.
2014. The effectiveness (or lack thereof) of aim-assist techniques in first-person
shooter games. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 937–946.
[27] Andrew Watson and Albert Ahumada. 2016. The pyramid of visibilty. Journal of
Vision 16, 12 (2016), 567–567.
[28] Andrew B Watson. 2013. High frame rates and human vision: A view through
the window of visibility. SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal 122, 2 (2013), 18–32.
[29] Andrew B Watson, Albert J Ahumada, and Joyce E Farrell. 1986. Window of
visibility: a psychophysical theory of fidelity in time-sampled visual motion
displays. JOSA A 3, 3 (1986), 300–307.
[30] Benjamin Watson, Rachit Shrivastava, and Ajinkya Gavane. 2019. The Effects of
Adaptive Synchronization on Performance and Experience in Gameplay. Proc.
ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech. 2, 1, Article 5 (jun 2019), 13 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3320286
[31] Bonghyun You, Hui Nam, and Hyojin Lee. 2020. Image Adaptive Refresh Rate
technology for Ultra Low Power Consumption. SID Symposium Digest of Technical
Papers 51, 1 (2020), 676–679. https://doi.org/10.1002/sdtp.13958
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June 2023.