 
 
How Much Faster is Fast Enough? User Perception of 
Latency & Latency Improvements in Direct and Indirect Touch 
Jonathan Deber 1, 2 Ricardo Jota 1, 2 Clifton Forlines 1, 2 Daniel Wigdor 1 
1 Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto 
Toronto, ON, Canada 
{ jdeber, jotacosta, daniel}@dgp.toronto.edu 
2 Tactual Labs 
New York, NY, USA 
cliff.forlines@tactuallabs.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper reports on two experiments designed to further 
our understanding of users’ perception of latency in touch-
based systems. The first experiment extends previous 
efforts to measure latency perception by reporting on a 
unified study in which direct and indirect form-factors are 
compared for both tapping and dragging tasks. Our results 
show significant effects from both form-factor and task, and 
inform system designers as to what input latencies they 
should aim to achieve in a variety of system types. A 
follow-up experiment investigates peoples’ ability to 
perceive small improvements to latency in direct and 
indirect form-factors for tapping and dragging tasks. Our 
results provide guidance to system designers of the relative 
value of making improvements in latency that reduce but do 
not fully eliminate lag from their systems. 
INTRODUCTION 
Interface latency – the time interval between a user’s action 
an
d the system’s response to that action – is inherent in an y 
computer system; input sensors must be sampled , 
computations performed, graphics generated, and displays 
updated. Existing commercial touchscreen devices have 
latencies that range between 50 and 200 ms [19]. In an ideal 
world, system designers would keep this latency below the 
threshold that is detectable by the human visual system, 
making the experience indistinguishable from a truly 
latency-free system. However, despite vast increases in the 
performance of computer systems, latency remains an ever-
present blemish on the user experience. 
Latency has been the subject of a large body of research, as 
it has a fundamental impact on the feel of a system and on 
user performance in pointing tasks. Early work provided 
guidelines for both direct and indirect pointing tasks [16] in 
the 100–1000 ms range. Performance-based measurements 
on indirect input devices showed little improvement below 
75 ms [14]. More recent work has focused on direct touch 
user interfaces, in which the touch surface and display are 
co-located [8,18,19]. As a whole, this body of work paints a 
conflicting picture, with results indicating that the minimal 
perceivable latency rests anywhere between 2 ms and 
100 ms. We argue that this discrepancy is due in large part 
to the various form-factors used in the previous work 
(indirect vs. direct) as well as the different input tasks 
(tapping vs. dragging). One of the goals of the present work 
is to help clarify the picture by conducting an experiment in 
which the relationship between direct and indirect input for 
tapping and dragging tasks is explored. The results of this 
work shed light on the likely sources of discrepancy in the 
literature and inform system designers about the minimal 
perceived latency for different touch-enabled systems. 
Another shortcoming of the previous research in this space is 
that it focuses exclusively on identifying the minimum 
perceivable latency for different input tasks. A system designer 
reading this research would know the ideal latency to reach in 
order to deliver a perceptually “latency-free” system; however, 
they are given no guidance as to the value of making 
improvements to the latency of their device that do not reach 
this ultimate goal. In this paper, we also present a second  
experiment in which we aim to investigate people’s ability to 
perceive improvements to latencies that fall well above this 
zero lower bound. Our results outline the value of improving 
latency by varying amounts in modern-day direct and indirect 
touch-based systems. 
 
Figure 1. Experimental setup. A) In Direct mode, participants 
touch the surface (1) and output is produced by the 
downward-facing projector (2). After seeing a pair of 
latencies, participants indicate the faster of the two using the 
control box (3). B) In Indirect mode, the mirror assembly (4) 
redirects the projector’s beam. The participant still touches 
the surface (5), but the output is displayed on the wall (6). 
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for comp onents of this work 
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permiss ions 
from Permissions@acm.org.  
CHI 2015, April 18 – 23, 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea  
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.  
ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04…$15.00  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702300  
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1827
 
 
RELATED WORK 
Latency, defined as the “delay between input action and the 
output response” [14], is an unavoidable part of any system, 
resulting from a variety of factors: reading the sensor(s) in 
an input device and transferring that data to the system, 
processing the input and performing application logic, 
rendering the updated UI, and waiting for the display to 
refresh its current image. The effects of latency on user 
interaction have been studied in previous works. Much of 
the prior work addresses system latency; they operate on the 
assumption of an existing baseline system latency and 
introduce additional latency as a factor. Techniques, such as 
those presented by Steed [ 25] and Kaaresoja et al. [9], can 
be used to measure baseline system latency . Researchers 
have also examined the point of subjective simultaneity (the 
separation at which two distinct stimuli are perceived as 
simultaneous) for haptic and visual stimuli [ 27], although 
most studies have not focused on touch input due to 
hardware limitations. 
It is understood that latency affects how humans perceive 
virtual environments . Allison et al. studied the effect of 
latency in augmented reality, noting that latency degrades 
the illusion of stability – a major fault for an interactive 
sy
stem [ 1]. Nelson et al. reported that latencies of 50 and 
100 ms impacted the ability to visually follow a virtual 
object with a head-mounted display [ 17].  Meehan et al. 
found that increased latencies of 50 and 90 ms reduced 
users’ sense of presence in virtual environments [15].  
We are particularly interested in the latency of input devices, 
and next examine work on indirect and direct systems.  
Latency in Indirect Input Systems  
Indirect systems separate input and output regions and 
require a pointing tool such as a mouse, touchpad, or stylus 
to provide information to the computer.  
So et al. introduced latency (0, 55, 110, 220, and 440 ms) to 
indirect pointing, and found the effect was correlated with 
the width of a target and latency [ 24]. Pavlovych et al. 
tested mouse input for a targeting task with latencies above 
20 ms and found that error rates increase significantly when 
latency rises above 110 ms [ 20,21,22]. Teather et al. 
observed that adding latency to a mouse and to a 3D tracker 
significantly impacted device performance; adding 40 ms to 
the system baseline latency affected performance by 15% 
[26]. Ware et al. studied the effect of latency for reaching 
tasks in 3D scenarios, and found that latency between 70 
and 800 ms affects performance [28]. Ellis et al. found that 
latencies between 100 and 500 ms significantly degraded 
performance of path tracing tasks, and that users could 
distinguish latencies as low as 33 ms [ 5,6]. None of these 
studies examined touchpad-based interaction. 
The disparity of the aforementioned results are likely due 
to the different devices being tested, supporting the 
suggestion that latency effects are task- and device-
dependent. 
Latency in Direct Input Systems  
Unlike indirect input systems that separate the input device 
and the display surface , direct input devices (e.g., 
touchscreens) have no intermediary; the user inputs directly 
on the display surface . As with indirect systems, direct 
touch input devices also suffer from the effects of latency. 
Anderson et al. conducted a qualitative study with users 
performing touchscreen tasks (e.g., web browsing and 
eBook reading) to determine the level of latency users find 
to be “acceptable” [2]. A delay above 580 ms was deemed 
unacceptable to the users, but it was noted that the 
experimental tasks were relatively brief (zooming, panning, 
and page-turning) suggesting that latency might be tolerable 
for longer tasks. Ng et al. studied the user perception of 
latency for touch input. For dragging actions, users were 
able to detect latency levels as low as 6 ms [ 19]. Jota et al.  
also studied touch input, and found that dragging task 
performance is affected if latency levels are above 25 ms, 
and that users are unable to perceive latency in response to 
tapping that is less than 24 ms [8]. Kaaresoja et al. looked at 
the visual perception of latency in physical buttons, and 
found the lower threshold of perception was 85 ms, but that 
the perceived quality of the button declined significantly for 
latencies above 100 ms [10]. 
Direct input systems that rely on a stylus, instead of touch, 
have also been studied. Ng et al. [ 18] focused on latency 
perception limits, and reported perception limits of 2 ms for 
a dragging task and 6 ms for a scribbling task. Using the 
same apparatus, Annett et al. studied writing and drawing 
tasks, and found that users could perceive latencies down to 
50 ms [3]. The combined findings of Ng et al. and Annett et 
al. suggest that latency perception is dependent on the task , 
and can still be perceived well below the latencies of 55 to 
200 ms provided by currently available digital pens. 
These direct and indirect studies educate us on specific tasks 
or form-factors, but there are no single comparisons between 
direct and indirect systems. Furthermore indirect studies 
have not taken advantage of the recently available low 
latency prototypes [12, 19], which might explain why the 
results of direct input studies that do take advantage of this 
hardware are significantly lower . We therefore set out to 
conduct a series of experiments that leveraged low latency 
hardware to directly compare the perception of latency on 
both direct and indirect form-factors. 
Measuring Latency Perception: Just Noticeable Difference  
A Just Noticeable Difference ( JND) is the minimum 
difference in a pair of stimuli that is detectable by a person, 
and can be measured for any perceptual stimuli (e.g., light, 
pressure, sound). A trial in a JND experiment [13] presents 
a pair of different stimuli (A and B) to a participant and asks 
them to identify which is faster (or brighter, louder, etc.). 
One stimulus, the reference, is held constant throughout the 
experiment; the second stimulus, the probe, is varied in 
each trial. The probe begins far from the reference and is 
moved closer to the reference whenever a participant is able 
to correctly distinguish them, and further from the reference 
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1828
 
 
when they cannot. The series of probe values is termed a 
staircase, due to its series of up and down movements. A 
reversal in the direction of the staircase occurs when a 
correct answer is given after an incorrect response, or vice 
versa. After a series of trials, the probe will converge at the 
point where the participant is just able to distinguish it from 
the reference and will oscillate indefinitely above and 
below this point (given a sufficiently patient participant). 
This threshold is termed the JND threshold. 
EXPERIMENT 1: PERCEPTION OF LATENCY IN DIRECT 
AND INDIRECT POINTING TASKS  
In this first investigation, we aimed to clarify and extend 
previous efforts on measuring the minimal perceivable 
latency for common touch-based interactions. We 
conducted a pair of JND studies in which participants 
performed either tapping or dragging tasks in both direct 
and indirect form-factors. We selected dragging and tapping 
tasks because they represent the basic input primitives used 
in most user interfaces. Our goals with this experiment were 
two-fold. First, we aimed to gather data for finger-based 
indirect (i.e., touchpad) interaction, which had previously 
been unexplored. Second, we aimed to gather a unified set 
of data for both direct and indirect form-factors with an 
identical set of hardware and experimental conditions in 
order to enable an apples-to-apples comparison. 
Hypotheses 
Our hypotheses center on the belief that input task and 
form-factor play major roles in peoples’ ability to perceive 
input latency and that these differences explain the variety 
of reported JNDs in the literature. 
Dragging provides the most visible manifestation of 
latency, since an on-screen object will begin to trail behind 
a user’s finger as the latency increases. We hypothesize that 
this physical distance between a finger and the graphical 
cursor is more easily perceived than the purely temporal 
difference between a tap and its graphical response. 
H1: Users will perceive a lower JND threshold 
when dragging than when tapping. 
With direct input, the finger and graphical response are co-
located, allowing the user to perceive both through the 
visual channel. We hypothesize that the visual difference 
between input and response in the direct form-factor is 
more easily perceivable than the difference between the 
kinesthetic touch and visual response in indirect input. 
H2: Users will perceive a lower JND threshold with 
direct input than with indirect input. 
Apparatus 
We used a high-speed Fast Multi-Touch (FMT) sensor and 
projector similar to that described in Leigh et al. [ 12] and 
illustrated in Figure 1.The system provides a 15 cm × 20 cm 
capacitive touch sensor, which would have provided too 
much freedom of movement for our participants; since we 
were interested in the JND thresholds for dragging and 
tapping input primitives, unconstrained movements over the 
entire touch sensor would have provided an unwanted 
confound. We therefore placed a cardboard mask on the 
touch surface to constrain the participant’s movements to 
the appropriate input method, thereby ensuring a one-
dimensional movement during a dragging trial and 
preventing any dragging movement during a tapping trial. 
Dragging trials used a 14 cm × 3 cm rectangular slot while 
tapping trials used a 2 cm square. A custom-built controller 
box with illuminated mechanical push buttons informed the 
participant whether stimulus A or B was currently visible 
and allowed the participant to provide input (e.g., switching 
between the two stimuli and entering their responses). The 
box was powered by an Arduino microcontroller and 
connected to the control laptop via USB. Simple audio 
feedback (e.g., beeps and tones) was provided to indicate 
the start of each trial, the end of each block, and whenever 
the user made an invalid selection on the control box. 
In its normal configuration, the FMT hardware is a direct 
manipulation system; the touch surface is parallel to the 
desk, and the high-speed projector is mounted on a support 
arm above the surface, top-projecting an image onto the 
touch sensor. To convert the system to an indirect form-
factor, we designed a removable bracket containing a front-
surface mirror mounted on a 45° angle. When the mirror 
assembly was in place, the path of the projector’s beam was 
redirected so that it appeared on a reflective screen mounted 
on the wall perpendicular to the touch surface, thereby 
simulating an indirect setup akin to a laptop touchpad and 
screen. The mirror assembly could be quickly inserted or 
removed, facilitating a rapid transition between form-
factors. The positions of the mirror and screen were 
adjusted so that the images drawn by the projector were of 
the same apparent size, regardless of whether they were 
projected on the touch surface or on the wall. To maintain 
the same reflectivity and apparent brightness, the screen 
was covered in the same contact paper used in the top-most 
layer of the touch sensor. In both cases, the visual feedback 
provided after a touch was a solid white 2 cm square. 
The FMT hardware is capable of running at latencies as low 
as 0.29 m s as well as at a wide range of higher latencies. 
However, it cannot run at any arbitrary latency; the possible 
latencies are discretely quantized based on two parameters: 
the sample interval and the queue length. The sample 
interval can be configured from 0.29 ms to 25.07 ms, in 
step sizes of 0.098 ms. The queue length is the number of 
samples buffered prior to processing, and ranges from 1 to 
255. The overall latency of the system is the product of 
these two parameters. For example, a sampling interval of 
0.98 ms and a queue length of 10 results in a latency of 
0.98 × 10 = 9.8 ms. For this study, we held the sampling 
interval constant at 0.98 ms (the closest value to 1 ms) and 
varied the queue length to alter the latency; this yielded a 
possible range of latencies of 0.98 ms to 250.67 ms, with a 
step size of 0.98 ms. It should be noted that while these 
non-integer latency values do not impact the analysis of the 
data, they do result in atypical values for some of the 
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1829
 
 
experimental parameters (e.g., the staircase step size is 
7.86 ms, a value which corresponds to a queue length of 8). 
At the start of each trial, parameters were sent to the FMT 
hardware by a MacBook Pro laptop running custom control 
software connected over a dedicated Ethernet connection. 
We empirically validated a variety of latencies using an 
oscilloscope triggered by vibration and photo sensors, as 
well as with a high-speed camera. 
Procedure 
After participants were briefed on the study, they completed 
a short warm-up session. Participants then began the main 
experiment consisting of four blocks of trials. For each trial, 
a participant was first presented with latency A and asked to 
tap or drag; all interactions in a single session used the 
same input technique. After trying latency A, the participant 
used the control box to switch to latency B and performed 
the interaction again. At this point, they could either switch 
back to see latency A a second time or indicate their 
decision as to which latency they thought was shorter 1. If 
they elected to see latency A a second time, they were then 
required to make a decision and could not switch back to 
latency B. Each trial was a forced choice. When participants 
could not distinguish the two stimuli, they were instructed 
to make their best guess [ 23]. After they entered their 
decision, the system would beep and move to the next trial . 
Halfway through the session, after the first two blocks, the 
mirror assembly was inserted or removed to change the 
form-factor of the device and the final two blocks of trials 
were completed with the second form-factor. At the end of 
the session, participants were quickly debriefed about the 
latency detection techniques they had used.  
For tapping tasks, participants were instructed to use their 
right index finger to press and release inside the target 
region. Participants could tap as many times as they wanted 
and could hold the tap for any length of time. However, 
extremely rapid tapping (i.e., oscillating the finger up and 
down as quickly as possible) was not permitted. 
For dragging tasks, participants were instructed to use their 
right index finger to press down on the left side of the 
target, move their finger to the right side of the target, and 
then back to the left. They could drag as many times as they 
wanted and at any speed. The dragging cardboard mask was 
sized so that the drag would be a predominantly one-
dimensional left/right movement on the x-axis, with little or 
no y-axis movement towards or away from the user. 
Sessions were designed to be completed in 90 to 120 
minutes. Participants were permitted breaks at any point in 
the experiment, either between blocks or within them. 
                                                        
1 The term “shorter latency” was not used during the experiment 
since it was felt that it might be needlessly confusing to non-
computer scientists. Instead, participants were instructed to choose 
the latency that was “faster”, “more responsive”, and “most 
closely following your finger”. 
Participants 
A total of 24 sessions were run across both form-factors (12 
drag and 12 tap). The sessions were performed by 14 right-
handed participants (6 male) recruited from the broader 
university community, with a mean age of 28 (sd = 5.4). All 
had 
experience with consumer touchscreen devices. 
Participants were offered the opportunity to perform either 
one or two sessions (one of each form-factor), separated by 
at least two hours to account for learnability biases and 
fatigue effects. 10 participants chose to participate in both 
sessions. Participants were compensated $20 for each 
session they completed. 
Design 
Each session consisted entirely of either a tapping or 
dragging JND study. Participants were randomly assigned 
to one type of session; those that participated in two 
sessions were randomly assigned the first session, and were 
given the other input technique in their second session. 
The latencies used in each trial were generated using an 
adaptive staircase algorithm. The reference was held 
constant at 0.98 ms (i.e., a FMT queue length of 1) 
throughout the experiment. The second latency, the probe , 
was varied according to Kaernbach’s simple weighted up-
down method [11]. A base step size of 7.86 ms (i.e., queue 
length of 8) was used, which was halved upon each of the 
first three reversals until it reached 0.98 ms. Decreases in 
the probe were reduced by the base step size while 
increases were increased by three times the base step size.  
A total of eight staircases were run for each participant, 
arranged in four blocks that each contained a pair of 
interleaved staircases. Two blocks were run using one 
form-factor, followed by two blocks using the other form-
factor. The ordering of the form-factors was 
counterbalanced. Within a block, trials from the two 
staircases were interleaved to prevent the participant from 
being able to (consciously or subconsciously) identify a 
pattern in the trials. For interleaved tapping staircases, one 
began at 117.96 ms and the other began at 58.98 ms; 
dragging staircases began at 98.30 ms and 39.32 ms. Within 
each trial, the order of presentation of the two latencies was 
randomized. 
The length of each staircase was not fixed in advance; a 
block continued until both staircases reached 10 reversals , 
yielding a 75% confidence threshold for the JND threshold 
[13]. In most cases one staircase reached 10 reversals 
before the other one since the order of correct/incorrect 
responses in each staircase is extremely unlikely to be 
synchronized. When this occurred, trials from the 
completed staircase continued to be alternated with the 
unfinished staircase in order to maintain the interleaving . 
This meant that a block would usually yield more than 10 
reversals for the staircases that finished first . When 
analyzing the staircases, we ignored reversals past the 10th. 
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1830
 
 
The overall design of the experiment was:  
12 sessions ×  
2 input techniques (tapping/dragging) ×  
2 form-factors (direct/indirect) ×  
2 repetitions = 
96 staircases 
As indicated above, the number of trials in a staircase 
depended on the pattern of responses. The average length 
across all staircases was 89.1, with a total of 8,556 
comparisons of latency pairs in the raw dataset. 
Results 
To analyze our results, we performed a repeated-measures 
ANOVA using Input Task  and Form-Factor as between-
participant independent variable s. Our dependent variable 
was JND, which was the average of the thresholds found 
from the two staircases in a block . To justify the use of a 
between-participants analysis, we first checked for 
asymmetrical transfer effects by performing a within-
participant analysis to look for effects from Form-Factor 
ordering (direct-then-indirect vs. indirect-then-direct) or 
Repetition. Finding none, we were able to proceed with the 
between-participant design. 
Our results confirmed both hypotheses. We found a 
significant main effect from Input Task  (F 1,22 = 55.79, 
p < 0.001, η2 = 1.00), with mean latency JNDs of 33 ms and 
82 ms for Dragging and Tapping tasks respectively. There 
was also a significant main effect from Form-Factor 
(F1,22 = 48.43, p < 0.001, η 2 = 1.00), with mean latency 
JNDs of 40 ms and 75 ms for Direct and Indirect input 
respectively. No other effects or interactions were detected. 
To dig deeper into the results, we computed two additional 
ANOVAs for the Tapping and Dragging tasks 
independently. For Dragging, Form-Factor had a 
significant main effect on JND (F 1,11 = 77.11, p < 0.001, 
η2 = 1.00) with mean JNDs of 11 ms and 55 ms for Direct 
and Indirect input. Equivalent results were also found for 
Tapping, where Form-Factor also had a significant main 
effect on JND (F1,11 = 9.44, p = 0.011, η2 = 0.80), with mean 
JND values of 69 ms and 96 ms for Direct and Indirect 
input. Combined JNDs (counting both tasks for a given 
form-factor) were 40 ms (Direct) and 75 ms ( Indirect). The 
mean latency JNDs are shown in Figure 2. 
Discussion 
Our results confirm our hypotheses surrounding the 
importance of form-factor and input task on the limits of 
latency perception. It is clear that people are much better 
overall at noticing latency with direct input touch devices 
than with indirect ones, suggesting that the threshold that 
system designers must reach in order to provide perceptually 
“latency-free” experiences is higher for touchpads than for 
touchscreens. Similarly, users perceive latency at a much 
finer level when dragging than when tapping. Indeed, with 
direct input, dragging provides the most visible 
manifestation of latency, since an on-screen object will 
begin to trail behind a user’s finger as the latency increases, 
creating a readily perceivable spatial distance between the 
two. This relationship between input task and latency 
perception was discussed by Jota et al. [8] in their own 
comparison to Ng et al. [19]; however, our results indicate 
that this relationship extends to indirect form-factors as well. 
Recent UI trends towards more fluid dragging actions are 
therefore likely to amplify the perceived latency in both 
form-factors and encourage system designers to further 
improve the latency of their devices.  
As
 a whole, these results bring some clarity to a 
disagreement in the literature over latency JNDs since they 
suggest that form-factor and input task must be considered. 
Ng et al. [19], who report a JND of 6.04 ms, argue that the 
textbook threshold of 100 ms (a value based on Miller’s 
work [ 16] and guidelines for audio in the 
telecommunications industry [ 4], among other sources) is 
incorrect and an artifact of the limited performance of input 
devices and measurement techniques available at the time 
of its origin. Our results suggest that both are correct, as Ng 
et al. report on a direct input dragging task and most others 
report on a variety of indirect input tapping tasks (menu 
selection, key typing, path drawing, etc.). Indeed our 
reported mean JNDs of 11 ms, 69 ms, and 96 ms for direct 
dragging, direct tapping, and indirect tapping correspond 
very closely to the reported JNDs of 6.04 ms (Ng et al., 
direct dragging), 64 ms (Jota et al. [8], direct tapping), and 
100 ms (textbook guideline) – with all of these previously 
reported values falling well within the 95% confidence 
intervals of our estimated means. 
EXPERIMENT 2: UNDERSTANDING INCREMENTAL 
IMPROVEMENTS ABOVE THE LOWER BOUND FOR 
DRAGGING AND TAPPING TASKS 
The results from Experiment 1 inform system designers as 
to what latency targets they must meet in order to provide a 
perceptually “latency-free” UI. As stated in the 
introduction, the vast majority of commercial devices fall 
well above these limits of perception; thus, reaching this 
goal is likely to be a long and laborious process. 
 
Figure 2. Mean latency JND thresholds for direct and indirect 
form-factors. Dragging, tapping, and combined (counting 
trials from both techniques) are shown in blues, greens, and 
striped bars. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Dragging
Tapping
Combined
Dragging
Tapping
Combined
Mean Latency JND (ms)
Direct Indirect
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1831
 
 
In the meantime, it is desirable to better understand what 
incremental improvements to latency would mean in terms 
of users’ perception of responsiveness. Early efforts 
investigating latency perception sought to find the lower 
bounds of perception, and although Gaussian models of 
perception can provide predictions regarding performance 
at interim latency improvements [7], we were interested in 
concretely mapping the relationship between touch input 
latency and user perception at levels typical of current 
consumer-level hardware. 
Why might an understanding of this relationship be 
valuable? Consider an OEM whose touchscreen device 
operates with 100 ms of latency. Would reducing this 
latency to 90 ms be noticeable by their users? How about a 
reduction to 80 ms? If that 20 ms improvement was applied 
to a device that operates at 50 ms, would that be noticed? 
Perhaps there would be no noticeable difference until a 
device passed some intermediate threshold. Similarly, an 
OEM wishing to produce a lower-cost device might 
consider components that would increase the latency, and 
may wish to know if and how much this increase would be 
perceived by their customers. When considering such 
questions, one understands the value of examining the 
perception of input latency improvements above the lower 
bound.  Experiment 2 aims to begin this valuable 
investigation for both tapping and dragging. Not knowing 
what we would find, it was difficult to generate specific 
hypotheses; as such, we proceeded with an exploratory 
study to help enhance our understanding of the space. 
Display Refresh Rate 
One major contributor to system latency in current touch 
devices is display refresh rate. No matter how quickly new 
graphical information is ready, it cannot be displayed as 
soon as it is available as it must wait to appear until the 
display can redraw its image. At the time of this writing, 
60 Hz displays are still the norm, meaning that a new frame 
is drawn every 1000 ms / 60 = 16.67 ms. This refresh rate 
has the perverse effect of quantizing and possibly masking 
improvements to latency that fall out of sync with this 
16.67 ms heartbeat. As a concrete example, consider a 
60 Hz system with a latency of 32 ms. Such a device will be 
able to update its UI within two frames. If this latency was 
reduced to 16 ms, then it would be able to update within 
one frame, resulting in a displayable difference. However, 
if the latency was reduced from 32 ms to 25 ms, the system 
would still require two frames before a UI update could 
occur, meaning that the reduction down to 25 ms will have 
had no visible impact. This observation governed many of 
the magnitude choices used in our experiment as we 
gravitated to base latencies and latency improvements that 
were multiples of a 60 Hz display. 
Apparatus and Participants 
We used the apparatus described in Experiment 1. For this 
experiment, we recruited 15 right-handed participants 
(7 male) from the broader university community, with a 
mean age of 25 (sd = 4.3). Nine of our participants took part 
in both the dragging and tapping sessions, for a total of 24 
sessions (12 tapping and 12 dragging). Participants were 
compensated $20 per session. 
Design and Procedure 
As in Experiment 1, each session consisted of a series of 
blocks of A/B trials in which the participant was asked to 
identify the faster latency. Each session consisted entirely 
of either tapping or dragging, and contained a total of 8 
blocks; the first 4 consisted of one form-factor, and the last 
4 of the other. As with Experiment 1 the order of the form-
factors was counterbalanced . Each pair of latencies 
consisted of a baseline latency, and that baseline minus a 
difference. All blocks contained the same set of latencies 
pairs; the order of the pairs was randomized, and the A/B 
position of the individual latencies within a pair were 
counter-balanced so that each latency appeared twice in the 
A (first) position and twice in the B (second) position.  
To determine our set of baselines, we considered the 
common case of a 60 Hz display, which displays a new 
frame every 16.67 ms, as discussed above. We therefore 
selected baselines that corresponded to updates occurring 
every 1 to 10 frames: 16.7, 33.3, 50.0, 66.7, 83.3, 100.0, 
116.7, 133.3, 150.0, and 167.7 ms. For completeness, w e 
also added a baseline of 8.3 ms (0.5 frames), for a total of 
11 baselines. We then selected differences that 
corresponded to 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 frames of 
improvement: 8.3, 16.7, 33.3, 50.0, 66.7, and 83.3 ms. Each 
difference was subtracted from each baseline. Pairs that 
resulted in a negative latency (e.g., 8.3 ms − 16.7 ms) were 
excluded, and differences that resulted in 0 ms (e.g., 
8.3 ms − 8.3 ms) were rounded up to 1 ms, the minimum 
latency that the experimental configuration of the system 
could produce. This resulted in a total of 51 pairs, which 
constituted the contents of one block of the experiment. All 
latencies were then converted to the nearest latency that 
could be reproduced on the FMT hardware, as described in 
the Apparatus section of Experiment 1 (e.g., 100 ms was 
converted to 100.27 ms); this conversion resulted in 
differences of less than 0.5 ms (0.3%). The overall design 
of the experiment was:  
12 sessions ×  
2 input techniques (tapping/dragging) × 
2 form-factors (direct/indirect) ×  
4 repetitions ×  
51 valid comparisons/repetition =  
9,792 trials. 
Results 
As in Experiment 1, we first checked for asymmetrical 
learning effects by looking for an ordering effect from 
Form-Factor. Finding none, we proceeded with the analysis 
presented in the following sections. While not included in 
the same statistical model, a comparison between Dragging 
and Tapping input reveals a large difference in latency 
perception. Overall, participants correctly identified 
improvements to latency 81.6% of the time when Dragging 
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1832
 
 
and only 68.2% of the time when Tapping. The lower 
bound of the 95% confidence interval for both means fall 
well above the 50% chance value one would expect if users 
were guessing. Figure 3 shows the mean percentage of 
correct trials for each input technique for both direct and 
indirect form-factors as well as the overall percentage 
combining all trials of both form-factors.  
Dragging Analysis 
We conducted a repeated-measures ANOVA using Form-
Factor ( Direct/Indirect), Latency Improvement , and Base 
Latency as independent variables, and Percent Correct as a 
dependent variable. 
As expected, Form-Factor had a significant main effect on 
Percent Correct  (F 1,11 = 47.56, p < 0.001, η2 = 1.00) with 
participants correctly identifying differences in direct input 
latency 86.9% of the time, compared to 76.3% of the time 
with indirect input. As was the case for the direct dragging 
JND threshold, this combination of technique and form-
factor provides the most visible manifestation of latency. In 
addition, Latency Improvement also had a significant main 
effect ( F1,11 = 118.31, p < 0.001, η2 = 1.00), with larger 
Latency Improvements  being easier to notice. A post-hoc 
pairwise comparison shows a significant difference between 
most pairs of Latency Improvements . Figure 4 shows th e 
mean Percent Correct for each Latency Improvement , 
broken down by form-factor. 
Overall, there was no significant main effect on Percent 
Correct from Base Latency  (F 10,110 = 0.85, p = 0.58, 
η2 = 0.43); however, there was a significant interaction 
between Base Latency  and Form-Factor 
(F10,110 = 3.76, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.99). In general, participants’ 
ability to identify improvements in indirect latency is 
consistent across Base Latencies, but is more accurate in the 
lower Base Latencies when working in the Direct Input 
Form-Factor. This may be due to the inherent perceptual 
advantage associated with a large percentage difference 
between stimuli (i.e., an 8.3 ms decrease from 16.7 ms is a 
50% decrease, while an 8.3 ms decrease from 166.7 ms is 
only 5%), and/or the fact that a decrease from a smaller 
baseline is more likely to result in a perceptually “zero 
latency” stimulus once the post-decrease value crosses the 
JND thresholds established in Experiment 1. In a trial 
where one of the two stimuli appears to be instantaneous, 
the task of discriminating the pair becomes easier, since the 
task is reduced to the simpler question of identifying the 
single stimulus that had any visible latency at all. 
Figure 5 shows the mean Percent Correct  for each Base 
Latency / Form-Factor  combination. There were no other 
significant effects or interactions found in the Dragging 
activity. 
While the effects of Activity, Base Latency , Latency 
Improvement, Form-Factor and their interactions are an 
interesting and useful topic for study, our primary 
motivation for this experiment was to work toward 
answering the question “Can people recognize 
improvements to latency across the latency spectrum?”  
 
Figure 4. Mean percent correct for each dragging latency 
improvement. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. 
 
50
60
70
80
90
100
8.3 16.7 33.3 50.0 66.7 83.3
% Correct Responses
Improvement (ms)
Drag Direct
Drag Indirect
Drag Combined
Figure 3. Mean percent correct for dragging and tapping. 
Direct, indirect, and combined (counting trials from both 
form-factors) are shown in darker, lighter, and striped bars. 
As a group, participants are better at recognizing improve-
ments to latency when dragging than when tapping.  
Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. 
 
50
60
70
80
90
100
Direct
Indirect
Combined
Direct
Indirect
Combined
% Correct Responses
Dragging Tapping
 
 Figure 5. Mean percent correct for each dragging base 
latency. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. 
50
60
70
80
90
100
8.3
16.7
33.3
50.0
66.7
83.3
100.0
116.7
133.3
150.0
166.7
% Correct Responses
Baseline (ms)
Drag Direct
Drag Indirect
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1833
 
 
Previous efforts (in this paper and others) have investigated 
the limits of human perception in respect to near-zero 
latency, but we are equally interested in whether or not 
people can perceive improvements to latency away from 
this lower bound. 
Table 1  shows the percentage of trials in which our 
participants (as a group) correctly identified the lower 
latency dragging interaction. These tables show each Base 
Latency / Latency Improvement combination. Cells marked 
with an asterisk have true means that are within a 95% 
confidence interval of the 50% chance threshold, and are 
therefore not statistically distinguishable from chance (i.e., 
combinations where the reduction in latency was not 
perceived), and are in the clear minority. Colored regions of 
the Tables are areas that are discussed in more detail below.  
Dragging Discussion 
Overall, the results from our exploration into the perception 
of latency improvements when dragging shows that there 
are not only clear effects from Base Latency and Latency 
Improvement, but also significant room for perceivable 
improvement to latency without eliminating it altogether. 
Considering Table 1, for the Direct Dragging condition, 
any improvement in latency of 1 frame/sec (fps) or more is 
easily observable by our participants as a whole ( uncolored 
area). Furthermore, even a small improvement of 0.5 fps is 
observable by a significant fraction of our participants for 
base latencies at or under 3 fps (orange area). For systems 
with higher base latencies, this small improvement did not 
yield observable differences (blue area). For Indirect 
Dragging input, there are clearly observable improvements 
to be had for latency improvements o f 2 or more fps 
(uncolored area), with less value for smaller improvements 
of 0.5 or 1 fps (yellow area). These trends seem relatively 
stable for base latencies across the tested spectrum. 
Tapping Analysis 
We ran another repeated-measures ANOVA using Form-
Factor ( Direct/Indirect Input), Latency Improvement, and 
Base Latency as independent variables, and Percent Correct 
as a dependent variable.  
 
Unlike with Dragging, we did not find a significant main 
effect for Form-Factor on Percent Correct  
(F1,11 = 2.18, p = 0.17,η2 = 0.27), with participants as a 
whole correctly identifying the lower latency in 69.3% and 
67.1% of Direct Input and Indirect Input trials respectively. 
Again, as expected, Latency Improvement  also had a 
significant main effect ( F1,11 = 19.55, p = 0.001, η2 = 0.98), 
with larger Latency Improvements being easier to notice in 
the Tapping task. A post-hoc pairwise comparison between 
means shows a significant difference between all pairs of 
Latency Improvement.  Figure 6 shows the mean Percent 
Correct for each Latency Improvement. 
Base Latency  had a significant main effect on Percent 
Correct (F1,11 = 8.85, p = 0.01, η 2 = 0.77), with 
improvements to higher Base Latencies  being correctly 
identified more often than those to lower Base Latencies. 
Figure 7 shows the mean Percent Correct for each Base 
Latency in the Tapping task. There were no significant 
interactions found in the Tapping analysis. 
 
Figure 6. Mean percent correct for each tapping latency 
improvement. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. 
 
50
60
70
80
90
100
8.3 16.7 33.3 50.0 66.7 83.3
% Correct Responses
Improvement (ms)
Tap Direct
Tap Indirect
Tap Combined
 
 
Table 1. Mean percent correct for dragging trials for each combination of base latency / latency improvement. Cells marked with 
an asterisk are not significantly different from chance (50%). Colored regions are areas of interest that are discussed in the text. 
95% confidence intervals range from 5% to 21%. 
 
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1834
 
 
As with Dragging interactions, we are keenly interested in 
whether or not small improvements to latency are 
perceivable to participants across the latency spectrum. 
Table 2 shows the percentage of trials in which our 
participants (as a group) correctly identified the lower 
latency tapping interaction. These tables show each Base 
Latency / Latency Improvement  combination; as with 
Table 1, cells marked with an asterisk are statistically 
indistinguishable from chance. While there are clear effects 
from Base Latency and Latency Improvement, these tables 
are included to suggest that there is a great deal of room for 
perceivable improvement to latency without eliminating 
latency entirely.  
Tapping Discussion  
Considering Table 2, it appears that for systems with base 
latencies at or below 33.3 ms there is little room for 
improvement in latency perception in either form-factor 
(red areas). When considering systems that have a higher 
base latency, improvements of 2 or more fps seem to have 
an observable difference (uncolored area) for all base 
latencies tested. Smaller improvements of 0.5 or 1 fps were 
generally not observable to our participants (purple area).  
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have examined user’s perception of latency 
for both dragging and tapping tasks under both direct and 
indirect form-factors. A set of JND studies indicated that the 
detectable thresholds for dragging (direct: 11 ms, indirect: 
55 ms) are lower than for tapping (direct: 69 ms, indirect: 
96 ms), and that direct touch systems are more susceptible to 
noticeable latency than their indirect counterparts. A second 
set of studies demonstrated that improvements in latency as 
small as 8.3 ms are noticeable from a wide range of baseline 
latencies, particularly when dragging. 
While the end goal of a zero-latency system will of course 
require a significant engineering effort, our results provide 
clear guidance to system designers that interim steps along 
that path are in fact worthwhile. The latency improvements 
that result from the removal of just a single 60 Hz frame 
(i.e., a decrease of 16.7 ms in latency) are perceptibly 
noticeable under many circumstances. 
While we are happy to report some clarity on users’ ability 
to perceive latency improvements (not only at the lower 
bound, but at higher levels as well), further effort is 
required. Next steps will include understanding the 
desirability of such improvements to a user, as well as any 
benefits to performance in common touch tasks, such as 
tapping, docking, crossing, and scrolling. We have begun 
investigating these follow-on efforts as we continue to 
strive to understand and provide zero-latency touch 
experiences.  
 
  
Table 2. Mean percent correct for tapping trials for each combination of base latency and latency improvement. Cells marked with 
an asterisk are not significantly different from chance (50%). Colored regions are areas of interest that are discussed in the text. 
95% confidence intervals range from 7% to 19%. 
 
 
    Figure 7. Mean percent correct for each tapping base 
latency. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. 
 
50
60
70
80
90
100
8.3
16.7
33.3
50.0
66.7
83.3
100.0
116.7
133.3
150.0
166.7
% Correct Responses
Baseline (ms)
Tap Direct
Tap Indirect
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1835
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank all of our colleagues at DGP and at 
Tactual Labs , as well as Katie Barker. Special thanks to 
Haijun Xia for his assistance with the videos. 
 
REFERENCES 
1. Allison, R.S., Harris, L.R., Jenkin, M., Jasiobedzka, U., and 
Zacher, J.E. (2001). Tolerance of Temporal Delay in 
Virtual Environments. In Proc. IEEE VR ’01, 247–254. 
2. Anderson, G., Doherty, R., and Ganapathy, S. (2011). User 
Perception of Touch Screen Latency. In Proc. Design, User 
Experience, and Usability (DUXU) ’11, 195–202. 
3. An
nett, M., Ng, A., Dietz, P., Bischof, W.F., and Gupta, A. 
(2014). How Low Should We Go? Understanding the 
Perception of Latency While Inking. In Proc. GI ’14,167–174. 
4. Che
shire, S. (1996). Latency and the Quest for 
Interactivity. White paper for the Synchronous Person-to-
Person Interactive Computing Env Meeting, Nov. 1996. 
5. Ellis, S.R., Bréant, F., Manges, B., Jacoby, R., and 
Adelstein, B.D. (1997). Factors Influencing Operator 
Interaction with Virtual Objects Viewed via Head-Mounted 
See-Through Displays: Viewing Conditions and Rendering 
Latency. In Proc. IEEE VR ’97, 138–145. 
6. El
lis, S.R., Young, M.J., Adelstein, B.D., and Ehrlich, S.M. 
(1999). Discrimination of Changes of Latency During 
Voluntary Hand Movements of Virtual Objects. In Proc. 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society ’99, 1182–1186. 
7. Harris, L., Harrar, V., Jaekl, P., and Kopinska, A. (2010). 
Mechanisms of Simultaneity Constancy. In Nijhawan, R., 
and Khurana, B. (Eds.). Space and Time in Perception and 
Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 232–253. 
8. Jota, R., Ng, A., Dietz, P., and Wigdor, D. (2013). How Fast 
is Fast Enough? A Study of the Effects of Latency in Direct-
Touch Pointing Tasks. In Proc. CHI ’13, 2291–2300. 
9. Kaaresoja, T., and Brewster, S. (2010). Feedback is… Late: 
Measuring Multimodal Delays in Mobile Device Touchscreen 
Interaction. In Proc. ICMI ’10, Article 2, 8 pages. 
10. Kaaresoja, T., Brewster, S., and Lantz, V. (2014). Towards 
the Temporally Perfect Virtual Button: Touch-Feedback 
Simultaneity and Perceived Quality in Mobile Touchscreen 
Press Interactions. ACM Trans. Appl. Percept. 11, 2, 
Article 9 (Jun. 2014), 25 pages. 
11. Kaernbach, C. (1991). Simple Adaptive Testing with the 
Weighted Up-Down Method. Perception & Psychophysics 
49, 3 (Mar. 1991), 227–229. 
12. Leigh, D., Forlines, C., Jota, R., Sanders, S., and Wigdor, D. 
(2014). High-Rate, Low-Latency Multi-Touch Sensing with 
Simultaneous Orthogonal Multiplexing. In Proc. UIST ’14, 
355–364. 
13. Levitt, H. (1971). Transformed up-down methods in 
psychoacoustics. J. Acoustical Soc. of Am. 49, 2 (Feb. 
1971), 467–477. 
14. MacKenzie, I.S., and Ware, C. (1993). Lag as a 
Determinant of Human Performance in Interactive 
Systems. In Proc. CHI ’93, 488–493. 
15. Meehan, M., Razzaque, S., Whitton, M.C., and Brooks, F.P. 
(2003). Effect of Latency on Presence in Stressful Virtual 
Environments. In Proc. IEEE VR ’03, 141–138. 
16. Miller, R.B. (1968). Response Time in Man-Computer 
Conversational Transactions. In Proc. AFIPS ’68, 267–277. 
17. Nelson, W.T., Roe, M.M., Bolia, R.S., and Morley, R.M. 
(1998). Assessing Simulator Sickness in a See-Through 
HMD: Effects of Time Delay, Time on Task, and Task 
Complexity. In Proc. IMAGE ’00. 
18. Ng, A., Annett, M., Dietz, P., Gupta, A., and Bischof, W.F. 
(2014). In the Blink of an Eye: Investigating Latency 
Perception During Stylus Interaction. In Proc. CHI ’14, 
1103–1112. 
19. Ng, A., Lepinski, J., Wigdor, D., Sanders, S., and Dietz, P. 
(2012). Designing for Low-Latency Direct-Touch Input. In 
Proc. UIST ’12, 453–464. 
20. Pavlovych, A., and Gutwin C. (2012). Assessing Target 
Acquisition and Tracking Performance for Moving Targets in 
the Presence of Latency and Jitter. In Proc. GI ’12, 109–116. 
21. Pavlovych, A., and Stürzlinger, W. (2011). Target 
Following Performance in the Presence of Latency, Jitter, 
and Signal Dropouts. In Proc. GI ’11, 33–40. 
22. Pavlovych, A., and Stürzlinger, W. (2009). The Tradeoff 
between Spatial Jitter and Latency in Pointing Tasks. In 
Proc. ACM EICS ’09, 187–196. 
23. Savage, W.C. (1970). The Measurement of Sensation: A 
Critique of Perceptual Psychophysics. Berkley: UC Press. 
24. So, R.H.Y., and Chung, G.K.M. (2005). Sensory Motor 
Responses in Virtual Environments: Studying the Effects 
of Image Latencies for Target-directed Hand Movement. In 
Proc. IEEE-EMBS ’05, 5006–5008. 
25. Steed, A. (2008). A Simple Method for Estimating the 
Latency of Interactive, Real-Time Graphics Simulations. In 
Proc. ACM VRST ’08, 123–129. 
26. Teather, R., Pavlovych, A., Stürzlinger, W., and 
MacKenzie, I.S. (2009). Effects of Tracking Technology, 
Latency, and Spatial Jitter on Object Movement. In Proc. 
3DUI ’09, 43–50. 
27. Vogels, I.M.L.C. (2004). Detection of Temporal Delays in 
Visual-Haptic Interfaces. Hum. Fact. 46, 1 (Spr. 2004), 118–134. 
28. Ware, C., and Balakrishnan, R. (1994). Reaching for 
Objects in VR Displays: Lag and Frame Rate. ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 1, 4 (Dec. 1994), 331–356. 
 
Understanding & Extending Touch Interfaces
CHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea
1836