  
How Fast is Fast Enough? A Study of the  
Effects of Latency in Direct-Touch Pointing Tasks  
Ricardo Jota(1), Albert Ng(2), Paul Dietz(2) and Daniel Wigdor(1) 
(1)Dept. of Computer Science 
University of Toronto, 
 Toronto, Canada  
(2)Microsoft Applied 
Sciences Group 
Redmond, WA, USA 
{jotacosta | dwigdor}@dgp.toronto.edu {v-albeng | pdietz}@microsoft.com  
 
ABSTRACT 
Although advances in touchscreen technology have 
provided us with more precise devices, touchscreens are 
still laden with latency issues. Common commercial 
devices present with latency up to 125ms. Although these 
levels have been shown to impact users’ perception of the 
responsiveness of the system [ 16], relatively little is known 
about the impact of latency on the performance of tasks 
common to direct-touch interfaces, such as direct physical 
manipulation.  
In this paper, we study the effect of latency of a direct-
touch pointing device on dragging tasks. Our tests show 
that user performance decreases as latency increases . We 
also find that user performance is more severely affected by 
latency when targets are smaller or farther away. We 
present a detailed analysis of users’ coping mechanisms for 
latency, and present the results of a follow-up study 
demonstrating user perception of latency in the land- on 
phase of the dragging task. 
Author Keywords 
Latency; direct input; direct manipulations; touch input. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.1. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Evaluation/methodology.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Touch-driven interfaces are ubiquitous today, most 
commonly in the form of mobile phones, but also as tablets, 
e-readers, and interactive tables. Despite the development 
of new and better touchscreens, problems with latency—the 
lag time between a finger touch and the on-screen 
response—persist, and have been identified as an issue for 
interactive systems and indirect input devices [13,14,22]. 
It is common for touchscreen devices to exhibit a latency of 
between 50 and 125ms; a delay that becomes noticeable 
when users interact with gaming applications, graphics 
tools, or move objects around a screen [ 16]. Initial solutions 
to minimize such effects have been proposed [25], however, 
the question of how and when latency affects user 
performance has not been addressed. Further, the work in 
this area has focused on indirect input devices, where the 
lagging on-screen cursor is the only representation of 
current position. This differentiates it from touchscreen 
interfaces, where the user might choose to ignore cursor 
position and rely on the finger as a zero-latency indicator of 
position. This distinction has not been addressed. 
Fitts’ law is commonly used to model the movement time 
required to perform basic input tasks for a GUI [ 7]. 
Although most formulations of the law do not include a 
term to explicitly account for latency, Mackenzie and Ware 
argued that it was inherent in the device specific constants 
commonly used to tailor the model, and introduced latency 
as an additional coefficient (see Equation 4) [ 13]. This 
formulation was demonstrated to account for latency in the 
devices the researchers studied. However, this work was 
limited in that the lowest latency device employed had an 
input-to-display lag of 8.3ms, and was indirect . Previous 
research has found that, for direct-touch input, there is a 
perceptual floor somewhere between 2-11ms , below which 
users do not notice lag [16]. Thus, 3 open questions remain: 
1) Does latency affect performance with direct-touch systems in 
the same way that it affects indirect input? 
2) Is there a floor, below which improvements in response time 
no longer improve pointing performance? 
3) What phases of a pointing task are affected by latency, and 
how do users adjust their behaviors in each phase? 
In this paper, we seek to answer these questions by studying 
the effect of latency on input to direct-touch devices. Using 
an experimental prototype, we examine how varying 
latency between 1 and 50ms can affect the speed and 
accuracy of input . We present 2 user studies. The first 
examines the effect of latency on performance in a pointing 
task, and finds evidence that there is no performance floor 
to the effect of latency. We also uncover evidence that the 
effects of latency are tied to particular phases of the 
pointing task, and thus conduct a second study to measure 
how users perceive latency for the finger-down portion of 
the task. 
  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full ci tation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2013, April 27–May 2, 2013, Paris, France. 
Copyright © 2013 ACM  978-1-4503-1899-0/13/04...$15.00. 
 
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2291
  
 
Our research aims to enhance the understanding of how 
latency affects performance , and, more specifically, how 
perception of latency affects that performance. Ultimately, 
we aim to contribute to the development of a new 
generation of touchscreen interfaces that can more 
accurately mimic the performance of manipulating real-
world objects, and to help software architects and 
interaction designers to focus their efforts on those elements 
which will yield the best-perceived results.  
PREVIOUS WORK 
Latency, defined as the “delay between input action and the 
output response” [ 13], can be attributed to a number of 
factors: the data rate of input devices, including mice or 
tracking devices; time spent processing input and running 
application logic; and time to render output. The effects of 
latency on user interaction have been studied by a number 
of researchers in a number of contexts. We begin by 
examining the effects of latency on a user’s overall 
perception of an experience. We then examine the effect on 
performance. Finally, we examine its effects in direct-touch 
systems in particular.  
Latency and Perception  
Much of the previous work addresses the issue of system 
latency. Previous studies operate with the assumption of a 
baseline system latency, and introduce additional latency as 
a factor. Baseline system latency can be established with 
techniques such as the one presented by Steed [22].  
Latency has been defined as “a cause for reduction of 
suspension of disbelief.” Allision et al. studied the effect of 
latency in an augmented reality application, noting that 
latency degrades this illusion of stability and can be seen as 
a major fault for an interactive system [ 1]. Nelson et al. 
reported that latencies of 50 and 100ms were found to affect 
the ability of participants to visually follow a virtual object 
with a head-mounted display [ 15].  Meehan et al. studied 
the effect of latency at 50 and 90ms on sense of presence in 
virtual environments [ 14]. The authors report that an 
increase in latency significantly contributed to a reduction 
in sense of presence.   
Such research has expanded the understanding of how 
latency affects the overall experience of a system. However, 
the focus of our work is on the effects of latency on 
performance of tasks. 
Latency and Performance 
Researchers have also explored how latency impacts 
performance when using an indirect input device. So 
studied the effect of imposing an additional latency (0, 55, 
110, 220, and 440ms) in a virtual reality environment [ 20]. 
Results demonstrated that latency affects pointing 
performance in this context, and highlighted the correlation 
between the width of a target and latency. Pavlovych et al.  
tested mouse input interaction for a targeting task for 
latencies above 20ms, and found that error rates increase 
significantly when latency rises above 110ms [17,18,19]. 
Tasks performed in 3D are also negatively impacted by 
latency. Teather et al.  observed that adding latency to 2 
input devices, a mouse and a 3D tracker, significantly 
affected device performance, and stated that adding 40ms 
to the system baseline latency affect ed performance by 
15% [ 23]. Ware et al. studied the effect of latency for 
reaching tasks in 3D scenarios. Their findings demonstrate 
that latency (between 70 and 800ms) affects performance 
[24]. This work found effects which differed from 
Teather’s observations, likely due to the different devices , 
mice versus 3D trackers—supporting the suggestion that 
latency effects are device dependent [ 17]. Ellis et al. 
found in a pair of works that added latencies between 100 
and 500ms significantly degraded performance of path 
tracing tasks, and that users could distinguish latencies as 
low as 33ms [ 5,6].  
Our paper builds on this existing work in 2 primary ways. 
First, we use a touchscreen (direct input) device, where 
latency may have a different impact on performance than 
has previously been shown for indirect input devices. 
Second, earlier work has targeted higher latencies (between 
35 and 337ms), whereas we focus latency times in the range 
of 1 to 50ms, which represents a level of performance 
beyond today’s commercial devices.  
Latency in Touch Devices  
Unlike indirect input systems which employ a pointing tool 
such as a mouse, stylus or joystick to provide information 
to the computer, direct devices (i.e., touch screens, light 
pens)  have no intermediary; the body’s movement alone 
acts as input. As with indirect systems, direct-touch input 
devices also suffer from the effects of latency. Anderson et 
al. conducted a qualitative study with users performing 
various touchscreen tasks (i.e., web browsing, photo 
viewing and eBook reading) , to determine the level of 
latency users find to be "acceptable" [ 2]. The authors found 
that above a delay of 580ms, users found the latency 
unacceptable, but noted that their experimental tasks were 
relatively brief, (specifically, zooming, panning, and page-
turning), which suggests that latency might be tolerable for 
longer tasks. 
Interestingly, Ng et al. studied the user perception of 
latency for touch input and produced very different results; 
for dragging actions with a direct touch device, users were 
able to detect latency levels as low as 2.38ms [16].  
Although these studies provide a critical insight into user 
perceptions of latency, an understanding of how latency 
affects user performance remains unexplored. Moreover, a s 
touch technology improves, we will soon have the 
capability to reduce latency to a virtually imperceptible 
level. Our work explores how touchscreen latency affects 
performance, and aims to find the latency level at which no 
further reduction will yield improvements in performance.   
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2292
  
 
Modeling Latency in Pointing 
As we have described, MacKenzie and Ware studied the 
effects of latency between 8.3 and 225ms for target 
acquisition, and found that lag affects both performance and 
error rate at all latency levels for mouse-based interactions. 
MacKenzie and Ware provided a modification to Fitts’ law 
to account for this [ 13]. In effect, past works have modeled 
performance, despite the fact that latency is present in most 
existing pointing tasks due to the computational loop 
required to provide feedback. Thus, prior work in 
examining pointing performance has not explicitly 
accounted for latency, and has generally upheld Fitts’ Law 
as a model for pointing performance. The Shannon 
formulation for Fitts’ law is shown in Equation 1: 
(1)           
Where ID is the “index of difficulty”, and is dependent on 
the distance (D) to a target of a particular width (W): 
(2)           
 
       
MacKenzie and Ware posited, however, that latency is, in 
fact, an input to Fitts’ Law, and that it was being masked in 
the device-specific constants ( a and b in Equation 1). He 
proposed that latency should be accounted f or, and presents 
a new formulation that takes latency into account: 
(3)                       
Where c is a formulation for latency.  
MacKenzie and Ware was able to verify this formulation 
empirically, and demonstrated how it predicted 
performance for latencies ranging from 8.3 to 225ms. The 
present work seeks to extend this prior effort in 2 ways: 
first, by determining whether these results apply to a direct 
touch input device, where a user could choose to simply 
ignore latent feedback, and rely on the position of their 
finger; and second, by determining whether the floor in user 
perception demonstrated by Ng et al. yields a floor in the 
effect of latency on pointing performance. 
EXPERIMENT 1: POINTING PERFORMANCE  
To answer these questions, we asked participants to 
repeatedly perform pointing tasks on a touch screen display, 
and included latency among the factors in the design of the 
experiment. This allowed us to observe the effect of latency  
on performance, and if there is an effect, determine how 
users changed their behavior to account for latency.  
Hypotheses 
Our first hypothesis is simply that Fitts’ law holds within 
each level of latency. This hypothesis can be viewed 
primarily as confirming the execution of the pointing 
experiment, as well as MacKenzie and Ware’s model of 
latency. In our case, varying the device’s latency is 
equivalent to applying Fitts’ law experiments in multiple, 
very similar yet distinct, devices. Thus, for each of those 
devices, the Fitts’ law should still predict performance , 
albeit with different device-specific coefficients, as per 
Equation 2.  
H1: For each latency level, Fitts’ law will predict 
performance. 
Next, we consider whether users will experience the effects 
of latency, or whether they will simply ignore the latent 
feedback and rely on cues from hand position. Our 
overarching expectation is that we will see an effect for 
latency:  
H2:  Performance decreases as latency increases. 
Howe
ver, we also believe that this effect will vary 
depending on the size of the target. With smaller targets, 
users rely more on feedback to ensure accuracy, thus we 
expect H3:  
H3: Performance is affected according to an interaction 
between width and latency. 
Further, we believe that latency will have an impact 
according to the distance of the target, as the greater th e 
distance, the greater the cumulative effect of latency (that 
is, the physical separation between the finger and the 
cursor). This occurs because the user will “wait and see” to 
more carefully position the cursor within the target. Thus, 
we expect H4: 
H4: Performance is affected according to an interaction 
between distance and latency. 
Because the ability to lift their finger immediately upon 
entry to the target is unique to direct-touch input, we 
anticipate this effect, despite the absence of it in past 
research
.  
We also seek to understand if we can identify a floor for the 
latency effect on performance, below which improvements 
in latency do not improve performance. Finally, we believe 
that the effect of latency on performance is actually 
composed of smaller effects on the various sub-tasks of 
pointing. In particular, we expect to see an effect for latency 
in each phase of the task: the time between the user’s finger 
landing on the device and its initial movement; the time 
spent moving towards the target; and the time spent refining 
the position of the cursor within the target. We do not have 
specific hypotheses for these effects, but rather analyzed 
each of these components separately to understand the 
user’s approach to dealing with latency. 
Participants 
Forty-Five participants from the local community ( 28 male, 
17
 female), ranging in age from 19 to 52, took part in the 
study. Participants were paid $10 for a one-hour session. 
All participants were right-handed and had previous 
experience using touch devices. 
  
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2293
  
 
Apparatus 
Participants executed the experimental task using a High 
Performance Touch (HPT) prototype similar to the one 
described in [ 16] (see Figure 1 ). The device consists of a 
23.5x15.5cm interactive surface, and a programmable 
FPGA. The prototype was responsible for the trial elements 
(cursor and target), touch feedback, and generating touch 
data. The trial logic (from finger touch-down to finger 
touch-up), was entirely run inside the FPGA, allowing us 
full control over the experience for latency.  
The HPT device was connected to a PC which controlled 
the flow of the experiment. The computer ran a Java 
application designed to: issue commands to the prototype to 
initiate a trial, log the touch data generated by the 
prototype, and provide user feedback before and after the 
trial execution. The computer was not responsible for any 
touch or visual feedback during the execution of the trial.  
Task 
The dragging task was based on the ISO 9241-9, one-
direction tapping task [ 9], with the modification that 
participants were dragging an object from 1 on-screen 
position to another, rather than moving their finger through 
the air (thus simulating the direct physical manipulation 
commonly used in touchscreen UIs). This is physically 
indistinguishable from “pointing” on an indirect trackpad 
(save clutching). Participants were asked to place their 
finger upon a cursor, drag the cursor across a path to a 
target, and release once the cursor was correctly positioned 
within the target. Targets were displayed as square boxes 
placed at the same height as the cursor. (see Figure 2).  
Procedure  
Participants completed a consent form and a questionnaire 
to collect demographic information. They then received 
instruction on how to interact with the apparatus, and 
completed 20 training trials to practice the dragging 
technique. Finally, they began to complete actual trials. 
After execution of each trial, a dialog box appeared to 
present the result of the trial (‘successful’ or ‘error’) and the 
cumulative error rate (shown as %) for the session (see 
Figure 2 d). Participants were instructed to speed up if the 
error rate fell below 5%, or slow down if it exceeded 5%. 
The participant then press ed the spacebar on the PC’s 
keyboard to advance to the next trial. If a target was missed 
(i.e.: the cursor was not successfully placed into the target), 
participants repeated the same task until the trial was 
completed successfully. The procedure lasted 
approximately 30 minutes and the entire study session was 
conducted in less than 1 hour. 
Design 
Dragging tasks varied according to three independent 
variables: latency of the cursor movement (1, 10, 25, and 50ms 
artificially inserted between input frames); width of the target 
(3, 4, and 5cm ; the cursor is a box that measured 2cm, see 
Figure 2); and the distance between the starting position and 
the target (3.5, 8.5, and 15cm).  
Each participant performed 8 repetitions of all 36 
combinations of levels of latency, width, and distance for a 
total of 288 trials per participant. The ordering of the 288 
trials was randomized across participants. In summary, the 
design of the experiment can be seen as: 
   4 levels of latency 
   3 target widths 
     3 target distances 
    8 repetitions 
 x 45 participants 
 =  12,960 total trials  
Measures and Analysis Methodology 
For each trial we captured the total completion time , the 
location of the cursor for each input frame, as well as the 
time of arrival and departure of the cursor on touch-down 
and touch-up. The time between the physical event and the 
recorded event varied according to the value of latency, 
with a maximum of the time between input frames 
separating the two (ie, a maximum of 1, 10, 25, or 50 ms) , 
For example, if latency is set at 50ms, then the cursor may 
appear as much as 50ms after the finger lands on the device. 
We also measured the number of repetitions (and thus 
errors) for each trial. The experiment design and 
accompanying analysis conform to the ISI 9241- 9 
recommendations [10], as well as the Fitts’ study guidelines 
provided in [21,27,28].   
 
Figure 1. Experimental apparatus. 
 
 
Figure 2. The dragging task for first experiment. Touch device, 
seen from top-down. (a) before the user selects the cursor. (b) 
after the cursor is selected. (c) the cursor has been dragged to the 
target. (d) the screen seen after the user lifts their finger. 
 
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2294
  
 
RESULTS 
We now examine the results of our experiment, grouped by 
hypothesis. Next, we will examine in more detail the effects 
of latency on the different phases of the task, in order to 
allow us to examine the more subtle effects of latency on 
pointing with a direct-touch input device. 
Analysis of Performance Measures 
We begin by examining H1. A repeated-measures ANOVA 
of time values indicates an effect of both width and distance 
on overall movement time: width (F 2, 88  = 142.665, p < 
0.001); (Distance F 2, 88 =142.173, p < 0.001). Splitting out 
the results by latency value, we again find significance for 
each of distance and width (index of difficulty) (see Table 
1). We thus confirm H1, that Fitts’ Law continues to assert 
itself, when considering the HPT at each level of latency as 
a different device. 
To allow us to examine H2, which predicts that performance 
decreases as latency increases,  we compute throughput as 
the ratio of the index of difficulty and movement time, as 
taught by [13] (though it should be noted that this practice is 
not universally accepted [ 27]). Latency had a significant 
effect on throughput (F3,132 = 114.651, p < 0.001), as shown 
in Figure 4) and time (F3,132 = 45.128, p < 0.001). As is clear 
in the figure, the effect is manifest as a decrease in 
throughput as latency increases. We thus confirm H2. 
Latency had a significant effect on performance, as 
predicted by H3. In particular, we found a significant effect 
for the interaction between latency and width on error rate  
(F6, 264 =2.581, p=0.019). Although participants made this 
choice in the speed-accuracy trade-off, w e still found a 
significant effect for target width x latency on movement 
time (F6,264=5.782, p<0.001). We thus confirm H3.  
Further, we hypothesized that for sufficiently large targets, 
a ceiling effect takes place, where the user does not need to 
“wait and see” if the cursor is positioned correctly within 
the target, but rather can simply lift their finger as soon as it 
is centered within the target, even while the cursor is 
catching up, but visibly inside the target. Indeed, when we 
limit our analysis to the smallest target size of 3cm, we find 
that latency is a factor of movement time , (F3,132=25.666, p 
 
Figure 3. Mean times for ID, separated by latency. 
 
Latency Effect of Width on MT Effect of Distance on MT 
1ms F2, 88 = 79.318  F2, 88 = 96.384 
10ms   F2, 88 = 101.406 F2, 88 = 70.109 
25ms F2, 88 = 71.571   F2, 88 = 158.429 
50ms   F2, 88 = 133.172   F2, 88 = 112.773 
Table 1. Repeated measures  
split by latency, all p-values < 0.001. 
 
Figure 4. Mean throughput by latency. 
 
Figure 5. Error rate for each distance, with separate plots 
for each latency value. 
 
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2295
  
 
< 0.001 ), in addition to the previously report effect of 
errors. This finding led us to believe that latency impacts 
movement time mostly during the final, refinement stage of 
pointing, in which the cursor is carefully positioned within 
the target.  
As expected, we found a significant effect for the 
interaction of distance and latency on movement time 
(F6,264=3.483, p =0.02, see Figure 5). We thus confirm H4. 
Floor Effect of Latency on Performance  
One of the questions still open is the existence of a floor 
beneath which pointing performance does not improve.  
Recall that we were able to confirm H2, and found that 
latency has a significant effect on throughput. However, 
post hoc pairwise comparisons of particular latency values 
revealed that there was no significant difference of the 
effects on throughput between the lowest 2 tested latencies 
(1ms and 10ms), whereas all other pairs showed significant 
differences, (see Table 2). 
 
Latency 
Throughput 
Mean 
Dif.  
Std. 
Error 
Sig 
1 – 10  0.007 0.010 1.000 
1 – 25 0.063 0.012 < 0.001 
1 – 50 0.109 0.011 < 0.001 
10 – 25 0.056 0.009 < 0.001 
10 – 50 0.102 0.012 < 0.001 
25 - 50 0.046 0.010 < 0.001 
Table 2. Pairwise comparisons for latency on throughput, 
adjusted for multiple comparisons (with Bonferroni correction). 
This is not sufficient for us to confirm or deny a floor 
effect. To perform a deeper analysis of this issue, we 
consider whether, despite the lack of significance, the mean 
value for the lowest latency was found to be as predicted, 
given the trends among the other 3 points.  
We performed a linear regression on the results of 
movement time for the latencies of 10 ms, 25ms, and 50 ms, 
omitting the lowest latency value. The results are shown in 
Figure 6, where it can be seen that this line fits the results 
precisely (R 2=0.956). Using this line to predict the mean 
movement time for latency=1ms, we find an expected mean 
of 747.6ms. Our empirical ly-measured results report a 
mean of 751.3ms, well within the 95% confidence interval 
predicted. Th is evidence suggests there may not be a 
performance floor.   
This observation indicates that any increase in latency decrease 
performance. To further understand this effect, we conducted a 
more detailed analysis of the movement logs of our study.  
Users’ Response to Latency 
Although an aggregate of user behavior is indicated in the 
performance measures, we wished to further examine 
precisely when in the pointing task the effects of latency 
affect performance. To that end, we analyzed our logs of 
cursor position throughout each pointing task.  
We divid ed data for each trial event into three phases , 
described as follows: 
Phasei is the time from touch-down to the beginning of 
finger movement. It can be seen as the user’s initial reaction 
time to the cursor indicating to them that their finger has 
been sensed, and they may begin to drag. To account for 
jitter, a 5px threshold was set on the initial movement.  
Phasem is the time from the beginning of finger movement 
to the entry of the finger into the target zone. This roughly 
corresponds to the ballistic phase of movement described in 
traditional pointing models [ 12], but is distinct in this case: 
given the difference in feedback between their finger and 
the cursor, the user may, or may not, treat this phase as an 
open loop movement. We have not attempted to detect 
whether or not the movement is open loop, but rather 
simply whether they are close enough (or not) to the target 
that there is value in conducting a closed-loop refinement. 
We are interested to know whether, during this phase, users 
may opt to slow down, perhaps to maximize the 
correspondence between finger and cursor positions. 
Phasef is the time spent with the finger inside the target 
area. This time roughly corresponds to the feedback-
adjusted final adjustments described in previous works [12]. 
However, again due to direct input, the user may be able to 
gain some efficiencies by fine-tuning their finger position 
prior to the ‘arrival’ of the latent cursor.  
Figure 7  shows the mean values for time spent at each 
phase of the experiment, broken out for each latency level. 
We consider first the movement phase, Phase m, where we 
see a significant effect for latency on time spent (F 3,129 = 
 
Figure 6. Regression line for predicted mean times. 
 
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2296
  
 
8.845, p<0.001). Post hoc pairwise comparisons of Phase m 
show that the difference between the 1ms and 10ms and the 
25 and 50ms are not significant. There is significance 
between 10 and both 25ms and 50ms. Compared to 10 ms, 
we do see greater time spent in Phase m for 25ms and 50ms 
conditions, suggesting that users may slow down somewhat 
when the cursor trails behind their finger (mean 6 % 
increase between 10ms and 50ms conditions).  
In Phase f, when the finger is within the target, we see the 
greatest difference in time across latency values (F 3,129 = 
63.741, p<0.001). Post hoc  pairwise comparisons find 
levels of the length of Phase f at 1ms and 10ms are not 
significantly different from one another (p=1.0), however, 
25ms and 50ms are each significantly different from 
10ms. This difference is likely due to latency’s effects as 
users perform fine adjustments, positioning the cursor 
within the bounds of the target. Between 10ms and 50ms 
latencies, we see a 26% increase in mean time spent in the 
movement phase. 
In further analyzing the logs, we found individual differences 
in behavior within each of Phase m and Phase f under varying 
latency. In general, 3 distinct strategies were observed. Some 
participants would quickly move their finger to the target, and, 
under high-latency conditions, wait for the cursor to catch-up 
before performing corrective movements. This would 
minimize Phase m, but prolong Phase f. Alternatively, some 
participants tended to slow down during movement, apparently 
to maximize the correspondence of the cursor and finger. This 
strategy increases the time spent in Phasem, while eliminating 
the “waiting” component of Phasef. Finally, some participants 
would apparently “split the difference”, slowing down 
somewhat in Phasem, but not maximize correspondence.  
Finally, we consider the first phase, Phasei, which can be 
characterized as the user’s reaction time to the system’s 
feedback that their touch had been registered. Here we find 
that latency had a significant effect on time spent in the 
phase (F 3,129=21.795, p < 0.001). It is interesting to note , 
however, the lack of difference between 1ms and 10ms of 
latency. If participants were able to benefit from the 
improved performance, we would expect the mean of this 
difference to be ½ of a frame of input (4.5ms).   
This result suggests that participants are unable to perceive 
the difference between 1ms and 10ms of lag between the 
time their finger lands on the screen and when the result is 
displayed. This also suggests, contrary to prior thinking, 
that they are able to perceive the difference between 50ms 
and 1ms. Because this result is unexpected, it led us to 
conduct a second experiment, designed to detect the 
threshold value at which users are able to detect latency for 
the land-on portion of a dragging task. 
EXPERIMENT 2: PERCEPTION RESPONSIVENESS 
Earlier work by Ng et al. demonstrated that users are able to 
perceive as little as 2.38ms of latency when dragging an 
object [ 16]. As they point out, however, it is likely that 
participants were actually noting the disparity between the 
position of the finger and the cursor, caused by latency , 
rather than the latency itself. Further, their experiment, did 
not examine users’ ability to perceive differences in latency 
for the land-on portion of the task. Earlier work suggested 
that perception of latency for this type of event is limited to 
100ms and above [4]. However, our results in Experiment 1 
suggest that users may be able to perceive latencies below 
50ms. To investigate this further, we conducted a n 
experiment in which participants were shown feedback in 
response to touching, in which we modulated the latency 
between finger-down and the appearance of the feedback. 
Our goal was to determine the precise lower bound at which 
latency can be detected by a user when first touching their 
finger to the screen.  
Like Ng et al., we measured perception using the just-
noticeable difference (JND) experimental method [ 16]. The 
JND is defined as the threshold level at which a participant 
is able to discriminate between two unequal stimuli : one 
consistently presented at the same level, termed the  
reference; and one whose value changes dynamically 
throughout the experiment, termed the  probe. A commonly 
accepted value for the JND is the lowest probe value at 
which a participant can correctly identify the reference 75% 
of the time . Any probe value that cannot be distinguished 
from the reference value with this level of accuracy is 
deemed “not noticeably different” from the reference [11].  
We conducted a within-subjects experiment to determine 
the JND level of the probe, when compared to our reference 
(1ms). While such a determination does not provide an 
absolute value for the lowest perceptible latency, it does 
serve as our “best case” floor condition against which we 
are able to measure other levels of latency. This experiment 
was conducted as a second part of our first experiment; 
participants would first finish Experiment 1, and then 
complete Experiment 2. This ensured that participants had 
ample time to familiarize themselves with the concept of 
latency, and to become facile with the apparatus. 
 
 
Figure 7. Mean lengths of each of the 3  
phases of the task, per latency level. 
0.040 0.040 0.045 0.049 
0.355 0.353 0.372 0.377 
0.329 0.338 0.372 0.417 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1 10 25 50
Mean Time (seconds) 
Latency (ms) 
Phase f
Phase m
Phase i
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2297
  
 
Apparatus 
The hardware used was the same as in the first experiment . 
In software, the low-speed projector was used to render a 
target on-screen (Figure 8, left). When the user touched the 
target, the high-speed device display ed a rectangle around 
their finger ( Figure 8 , right). The time between the touch 
and the display of the high-speed feedback was modulated 
experimentally. 
 
Participants 
Twenty participants of Experiment 1 were asked to 
continue and complete Experiment 2. Participants were paid 
an additional $10 for this 30-minute session.  
Task and Procedure 
Participants were asked to tap the on-screen target, and to 
note the latency of the appearance of the rectangle. The 
latency value was then reset, and participants were asked to 
touch the target and note latency again. They were then 
asked to indicate which of the 2 trials was “faster”. 
Participants could tap repeatedly, and were also allowed to 
repeat either of the 2 latency values. Participants indicated 
their choice verbally to the experimenter, and the next 
latency pair was loaded.  
Design 
In order for each trial to converge at our desired JND 
confidence level of 75%, the amount of added latency was 
controlled according to an adaptive staircase algorithm , [11, 
16].  Each correct identification of the reference value 
caused a decrease in the amount of latency in the probe, 
while each incorrect response caused the probe’s latency to 
increase.  Step sizes followed the simple weighted up-down 
method described by Kaernbach, wherein increases had a 
three-fold multiplier applied to the base step size, and 
decreases were the base step size (initially 8ms) [ 10]. When 
a participant responded incorrectly after a correct response, 
or correctly after an incorrect response, this was termed a 
“reversal” as it caused the direction of the staircase 
(increasing or decreasing) to reverse. The step size, initially 
8ms, was halved at each reversal, to a minimum step size of 
1ms. This continued until a total of 10 reversals occurred, 
resulting in a convergence at 75% correctness (per [10]). 
Each participant completed two staircase “runs”. One run 
started at the minimum probe latency (1ms) and the other at 
the maximum (120ms). The higher start value (120ms) was 
chosen because pilot testing made it clear that this value 
would be differentiated from the 1ms reference with near 
100% accuracy, avoiding ceiling effects.  
Staircases were run in parallel, in interleaved pairs to 
prevent response biases that would otherwise be caused by 
the participants’ ability to track their progress between 
successive stimuli [ 10]. The entire experiment, including 
breaks between staircases, was completed by eac h 
participant within a single half-hour session. 
Results and Discussion 
Our results show that participants’ ability to perceive 
latency in feedback to the land- on event range from 20 to 
100ms, with a mean JND of 64ms (standard deviation of 
24ms, see Figure 9). This helps to explain the floor effect 
observed for Phase f in Experiment 1—because 
participants can only perceive touch feedback above 
20ms, they are unable to react more quickly to the 
feedback on finger-down under 1 ms of latency than they 
are under 10ms of latency.  
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We divide our discussion into 2 sections. The first 
discussion is intended to establish guidelines as to what 
level of performance is required to minimize various issues 
caused by latency, while the second introduces 
considerations on how to adapt the user interface to take 
advantage of a low latency system.  
How Fast is Fast Enough?  
As was described by Ng et al., achieving latencies even 
within an order of magnitude of those we have investigated 
here, may well require fundamental changes to software 
architectures [ 16]. It is perhaps heartening that, although 
users may be able to perceive latencies below 10ms, there is 
apparently little performance benefit of achieving such 
speeds. Indeed, the performance on direct physical 
manipulation tasks appears to be little advantaged by 
latencies much lower than 25ms. Further, when we limit 
physical interaction primitives to tap-based input alone, and 
compare 50ms and 1ms of latency, it would appear that a 
benefit only on the order of 7% improvement in response 
times to touches is produced. Indeed, if input were 
restricted to tapping, most users appear to not even notice 
improvements in latency below 40ms.  
Thus, there is a tension between the common desire to 
employ direct physical manipulation metaphors, and the 
desire to hide latency from the user. Past efforts in this 
regard have focused on altering visual responses, so as to 
 
Figure 8. Software for Experiment 2. Left: before the 
participant touches. Right: after he has touched. 
 
Figure 9. Mean JND (ms) per participant. Bars are std-dev. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2298
  
 
“trick” the user into perceiving the separation between the 
finger and the feedback of finger location as intentional 
design elements [ 26]. This may help to explain why 
developers of modern touch devices, such as the iOS and 
Android, have so frequently opted for tap-based interaction 
primitives, despite their many disadvantages when 
compared with primitives that utilize some dragging to 
actuate [26].  
In summation, it would appear that achieving a touch- to-
display latency of 20ms would be sufficient to ensure the 
majority of users do not perceive it, and thus would see no 
performance degradation, when input is restricted to 
tapping. When direct manipulation is employed, latencies 
down to 2.38ms are required to alleviate user perception 
when dragging (per [ 16]). Our results are consistent with 
this, in that our results suggest that performance continues 
to be improved when reducing latencies, and suggest that 
improvements beyond this level may continue to aid 
performance of common tasks. Such improvements could 
contribute to the adoption of tablets beyond the niche of 
media consumption. One example is the accurate 
representation of signatures that require precise, feedback 
with minimal latency. 
User Interface Implications 
Our prototype did not have any other source of latency 
other than the input latency artificially inserted by the 
experimental setup. Often, this is not the case: most real 
world operating systems, windowing and UI toolkits, and 
applications, introduce additional, often widely variable, 
latency. Ng et al. proposed overcoming this by bifurcating 
the input stream, so that all touch events are simultaneously 
routed to a high-speed, hardware-based, low-latency 
subsystem, and a copy is sent to the input stack for regular 
processing [ 16]. Unaddressed, however, is how to modify 
the software stack, given our knowledge of users’ 
perceptual abilities with respect to latency. 
One commonly employed software tool is an input event 
queue. Current implementations of the input queue already 
account for latency and skip events that are too old, or 
combine events that are identical (or otherwise provide a 
null aggregate affect). What our results show is that 
responding to position events mid-drag which are older than 
10ms will reduce performance.  
A naïve approach would be to simply discard events 
beyond a threshold age. In this case, the temptation might 
be to flatten queue events within the last 2 ms—or even just 
to ensure only 1 dragging event is ever queued—to reduce 
the perception of latency. Such an approach would , 
however, be prone to jitter whenever the system could not 
maintain the high refresh rate. This trade-off is not desirable 
[19]. A common approach to reduce jitter is to animate 
transitions between locations, but animation would, by its 
very nature, reintroduce lag into the system.  
An alternative we are exploring is to, indeed, flatten the 
queue, so that intermediate events are always discarded. 
However, this change requires the queue management 
algorithm to know additional details about the state of the 
various UI widgets (indeed, that something is being 
‘dragged’, and thus that the path does not matter). To 
reduce the perception of jitter, we are exploring the 
adaptation of Phosphor, which provides annotations in 
place of animations. This has the advantage of showing the 
user the path of movement, without the slow-dow n 
necessitated by animation [3].  
Another implication of our findings is target size. Past work 
on target size has focused on land-on or take-off target size, 
but has not explored the importance of dragging target size. 
Despite this lack of attention, dragging to small targets is 
indeed common on touch devices; for example, moving the 
text carrot to position it at the beginning of a word. Our 
results demonstrate that small targets are harder to hit under 
high latency. To solve this, designers can focus on 
increasing the size of targets for drag operations, or indeed 
explore temporarily, dynamically changing target size 
according to input latency, thus slightly decreasing index of 
difficulty to facilitate targeting. In addition, practitioners 
can, if possible, increase input event dequeuing frequency 
whenever the user closes-in on a small target, perhaps by 
prioritizing the feedback thread. 
Today, designers compensate for latency through the use of 
animated effects, such as the springiness employed in iOS. 
As latencies are reduced, such effects become superfluous. 
Thus, an interesting area of future work is to examine how 
current primitives are affected by latency, and how their 
design, look, and feel may be changed.  
Finally, our results suggest that there is a specific window 
of opportunity between the time he user’s finger lands on 
the screen, and when feedback for that event must take-
place to be perceived as instantaneous. Although not as 
long as previously thought, it is still sufficiently long to b e 
utilized to perform operations such as waiting for the finger 
to make full contact, an d mapping input to a point [8]. The 
size of this window was found in our experiment to be 
somewhere between 20ms (100 % of participants) and 
40ms (85% of participants). 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we study of the effect of latency in direct-
touch pointing tasks. We conducted two user studies: the 
first measured performance under various latency 
conditions, while the second measured user perception for 
initial input feedback. We found that latency was a factor 
that influences both performance and perception. As past 
results predicted, user s’ performance decreased with 
increasing latency. We also found that it is the final, 
refinement stage of the pointing task which is most affected 
by input latency.  
We also revealed that users’ reaction times are limited, and 
thus, that providing feedback of a user’s initial touch more 
quickly than 10ms does not appear to improve performance. 
Indeed, we found that no participant could discern latency 
for land- on below 20ms, and 85% could not differentiate 
between 40ms and 1ms of latency for the land-on event.  
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2299
  
 
Thus, we advocate a focus on tapping input for higher-
latency hardware, and to ensure any hardware intended to 
rely extensively on direct physical manipulation metaphors 
aim for latency approaching 1ms . We believe that this will 
improve user performance and create a suspension of 
disbelief on direct manipulation metaphors applied today.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Steven Sanders and Kim Wright for 
their input on the document, and all participants for their 
zeal during the experiments.  
REFERENCES 
1. Allison, R. S., Harris, L. R., Jenkin, M., Jasiobedzka, U., and 
Zacher, J. E. (2001). Tolerance of Temporal Delay in Virtual 
Environments. IEEE VR 2001, 247–254.  
2. Anderson,  G., Doherty, R., and Ganapathy, S. (2011). User 
Per-ception of Touch Screen Latency. Design, User 
Experience, and  Usability. Theory, Methods, Tools, and 
Practice. 195-202. 
3. Baudisch P., Tan D., Collomb M., Robbins D., Hinckley K., 
Agrawala M., Zhao S., and Ramos G. (2006). Phosphor: 
explaining transitions in the user interface using afterglow 
effects. User interface software and technology (UIST '06). 
ACM, New York, USA, 169-178. 
4. Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J. D., and Robertson, G. G. (1991). 
The Information Visualizer: An Information Workspace.  
Proceedings of (CHI '91), 181-188. 
5. Ellis, S. R., Breant, F., Manges, B., Jacoby, R., and Adelstein, 
B. D. (1997). Factors influencing operator interaction with 
virtual objects viewed via head-mounted see-through displays: 
viewing conditions and rendering latency. Virtual Reality 
1997, 138–145. 
6. Ellis, S. R., Young, M. J., Adelstein, B. D., and Ehrlich, S. M. 
(1999). Discrimination of changes of latency during voluntary 
hand movements of virtual objects. Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society, 1182–1186. 
7. Fitts P. (1954). The information capacity of the human motor 
system in controlling the amplitude of movement. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, volume 47, number 6, June 1954. 
8. Holz C. and Baudisch P. (2011). Understanding touch. In 
Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors 
in computing systems (CHI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
2501-2510., 91–139. 
9. ISO/DIS9241–9 Ergonomic requirements for office work with 
visual display terminals (VDTs) – Part 9: Requirements for 
non-keyboard input devices. International Standard, 
International Organization for Standardization, 2000. 
10. Kaernbach, C. (1991). Simple adaptive testing with the 
weighted up-down method, Perception & Psychophysics 49, 
227-229. 
11. Levitt, H. (1971). Transformed up-down methods in psychoa-
coustics.  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 49(2): 
467–477. 
12. MacKenzie, I. S. (1992). Fitts’ law as a research and design 
tool in human-computer interaction. 
13. MacKenzie, I. S., and Ware, C. (1993). Lag as a determinant 
of human performance in interactive systems. ACM CHI 1993. 
14. Meehan, M., Razzaque, S., Whitton, M. C., and Brooks, F. P. 
(2003). Effect of Latency on Presence in Stressful Virtual 
Environments. In IEEE VR 2003, 141–138. 
15. Nelson, W. T. and Roe, Merry M. and Bolia, Robert S. and 
Morley, Rebecca M. (1998). Assessing Simulator Sickness in 
a See-Through HMD: Effects of Time Delay, Time on Task, 
and Task Complexity. Proceedings of the 2000 IMAGE 
Conference. 
16. Ng, A., Lepinski, J., Wigdor, D., Sanders, S., Dietz, P., 
Designing for Low-Latency Direct-Touch Input. To appear in 
Proceedings of the ACM symposium on user interface 
software and technology. ACM, New York, NY, USA. (in 
press). 
17. Pavlovych A., Gutwin C. (2012). Assessing Target 
Acquisition and Tracking Performance for Moving Targets in 
the Presence of Latency and Jitter, Graphics Interface 2012, 
May 2012. 
18. Pavlovych A., Stuerzlinger W. (2011), Target Following 
Performance in the Presence of Latency, Jitter, and Signal 
Dropouts, Graphics Interface 2011, 33-40, May 2011. 
19. Pavlovych A., Stuerzlinger W. (2009). The Tradeoff between 
Spatial Jitter and Latency in Pointing Tasks, ACM Symposium 
on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems 2009, 187-
196, July 2009. 
20. So, R. H. Y., and Chung, G. K. M. (2005). Sensory Motor 
Responses in Virtual Environments: Studying the Effects of 
Image Latencies for Target-directed Hand Movement. In 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, IEEE-EMBS 
2005, 5006–5008. 
21. Soukoreff W. and  MacKenzie I. (2004). Towards a standard 
for pointing device evaluation, perspectives on 27 years of 
Fitts' law research in HCI. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies. 61, 6 (December 2004), 751-789. 
22. Steed A. (2008). A simple method for estimating the latency of 
interactive, real-time graphics simulations. In Proceedings of 
the 2008 ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and 
technology (VRST '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 123-
129. 
23. Teather, R., Pavlovych, A., Stuerzlinger, W., and MacKenzie, 
S. (2009). Effects of tracking technology, latency, and spatial 
jitte
r on object movement, IEEE 3DUI 2009, 43–50. 
24. Ware C. and Balakrishnan R. (1994). Reaching for objects in 
VR displays: lag and frame rate. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact. 1, 4, 331-356. 
25. Wigdor D., Williams S., Cronin M., Levy R., White K., 
Mazeev M., and Benko H. (2009). Ripples: utilizing per-
contact visualizations to improve user interaction with touch 
displays. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual ACM symposium 
on User interface software and technology (UIST '09). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 3-12. 
26. Wigdor, D., Wixon, D. (2011). Brave NUI World: Designing 
Natural User Interfaces for Touch and Gesture (1st ed.). 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA. 
27. Zhai, S. Characterizing computer input with Fitts’ law 
parameters ―The information and non-information aspects of 
pointing. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 
61(6), 791-809. December 2004. 
28.  Zhai, S., Kong, J., Ren, X., Speed-accuracy trade-off in Fitts’ 
law tasks — On the equivalency of actual and nominal 
poi
nting  precision. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 61(6), December 2004. 
Session: Touch Interaction
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France
2300