Publication date: 14 September 2023 
UK home broadband 
performance 
The performance of fixed-line broadband 
delivered to UK residential customers 
Welsh translation available 
 
 
Classification: HIGHLY SENSITIVE 
Contents 
Section 
Overview .................................................................................................................................... 3 
Download speeds ....................................................................................................................... 7 
Download speeds: network slowdown .................................................................................... 11 
Upload speeds .......................................................................................................................... 14 
Netflix streaming and disconnections ..................................................................................... 15 
Broadband package comparisons ............................................................................................ 18 
Geographic comparisons ......................................................................................................... 23 
 
 
Overview 
Ofcom’s Communications Market Report 2023 shows that 86% of UK households take fixed 
broadband. Increased homeworking, and the widespread use of bandwidth-heavy services such as 
video streaming, mean that most people require reliable and high-quality broadband.  
This report summarises our research to understand broadband performance. It is based on two main 
sources of data: data collected by SamKnows from volunteers who connect a hardware monitoring 
unit to their broadband router; and data provided to Ofcom by the UK’s four largest broadband 
providers. 
What we have found – in brief 
Service take-up 
Superfast products accounted for 93% of all home broadband lines. The share of residential 
broadband connections that were superfast products (those with an advertised speed of 30 Mbit/s 
or higher) increased from 91% to 93% in the year to March 2023, while 11% of lines were ultrafast 
products with advertised speeds of at least 300 Mbit/s. 
Connection speeds 
Average residential download speeds have continued to increase. The median average download 
speed of UK home broadband connections was 69.4 Mbit/s in March 2023, a 10.1 Mbit/s (17%) 
increase year-on-year, as people upgraded to higher-bandwidth services.  
Three per cent of lines had an average 24-hour actual download speed of less than 10 Mbit/s in 
2023, down from 4% in 2022. This is the minimum download speed required for a decent broadband 
connection. Less than 1% of lines had an advertised download speed under 10 Mbit/s. 
The gap between average urban and rural speeds has narrowed. There was a 26% difference 
between average urban (70.3 Mbit/s) and rural (56.0 Mbit/s) download speeds during the 8-10pm 
peak-time period, down from 58% in 2022.  
There was a large increase in median average upload speeds, rising to 18.4 Mbit/s in March 2023. 
This was a year-on-year increase of 7.8 Mbit/s (73%). 
Many ADSL2+ users will experience a considerable performance improvement if they upgrade to 
FTTC. Average download speeds for basic (36-38 Mbit/s) FTTC services were around three times 
those of ADSL2+ services, while upload speeds were more than eight times those of ADSL2+.  
Cable and full-fibre services recorded the highest average speeds. The fastest median average 24-
hour download speed was recorded by Virgin Media’s 1.13 Gbit/s cable package (1,137 Mbit/s), 
while Gigaclear’s 300 Mbit/s full-fibre service had the highest average upload speed (337 Mbit/s). 
Performance varies by package and technology, but broadband services using the same wholesale 
input tend to perform similarly. While people can achieve improved performance through switching 
technology or speed tier, we found few differences between comparable services offered by 
providers such as BT, EE, Plusnet, Sky and TalkTalk, which use the same Openreach wholesale inputs. 
Network slowdown 
Across all connections, 8-10pm peak-time download speeds averaged 95% of maximum speeds. 
ADSL2+ connections suffered the highest proportional slowdown during busy periods, with peak-
time download speeds averaging 92% of average maximum speeds in March 2023.  
 
4 
Dashboard 
 
  

 
5 
Notes on the data included in this report 
Our methodology measures the performance delivered by an internet service provider to the 
customer’s router. 
However, the connection experienced on devices in the home’s connection will vary, as it is 
impacted by additional factors not captured in our research. These include Wi-Fi performance, the 
quality of any in-home wiring, in-home congestion when a number of devices are using the 
broadband connection, device limitations and the performance of servers delivering content over 
the connection. We have published advice on our website on how broadband users can improve 
their Wi-Fi experience, along with a broadband availability checker. 
Further analysis of results from our March 2023 testing, including broadband provider package 
comparisons covering other aspects of broadband performance that help determine the overall 
user-experience, can be found in the interactive dashboard that accompanies this report. 
There are other ways to measure the performance of broadband connections. Our Connected 
Nations reports i nclude analysis of broadband speeds based on information on the ‘sync speed’ or 
‘configured speed’ of active broadband lines, which is provided to Ofcom by broadband providers. 
This approach measures the maximum achievable connection speed between the broadband 
provider’s access network and the customer’s premises, which is not affected by network slowdown 
and is usually higher than the ‘end-to-end’ actual line speed measurements we present here. 
This is Ofcom’s last planned Home Broadband Performance report. We continue to believe there is 
value in making information regarding the performance of UK broadband connections available to 
consumers and stakeholders, and we are exploring the use of alternative data sources to do this. 
Embedded panel tests 
One limitation of our hardware-based measurement methodology is that we can only include a 
broadband package when we have enough volunteer panellists using it, and so it can be difficult to 
include packages with lower take-up, including those using newer technologies such as full fibre. To 
try to address this, we requested ‘embedded’ data from the UK’s four biggest broadband providers 
and this report includes analysis of this information.  
BT and Virgin Media have SamKnows test firmware embedded into some of their customers’ 
routers, and Sky and TalkTalk have similar tests provided by ASSIA Inc. in some of their routers. 
These broadband providers have given Ofcom access to anonymised March 2023 test data for 
upload speeds, download speeds and latency from a selection of these customers. 
Ofcom benchmarking has confirmed that running the tests on a broadband provider’s router rather 
than on one of SamKnows’ ‘Whitebox’ measurement units has little influence on the recorded 
measurements. However, there are some differences which mean that like-for-like comparison is 
not always possible, and we have noted where we have used ‘embedded’ test data captured by 
broadband providers’ routers. 
Most SamKnows Whitebox measurement units are connected to the panellist’s broadband router 
using Gigabit Ethernet. Gigabit Ethernet can transmit data at a speed of 1 Gbit/s but packet 
overheads mean that the maximum speed at which data can be transferred over a Gigabit Ethernet 
interface is approximately 940 Mbit/s. This limits the maximum connection speed that can be 
accurately measured over Gigabit Ethernet to around 940 Mbit/s. Due to this limitation, we have 
been unable to include download speed data captured by SamKnows’ Whiteboxes relating to 1.13 
 
6 
Gbit/s cable services in this report and have instead used embedded test data provided to Ofcom by 
Virgin Media. 
Mean and median averages 
We focus on median averages (the middle value when a dataset is ordered from lowest to highest) 
rather than mean averages (calculated by adding all values in a dataset and then dividing by the 
number of values in that set) in our reports when analysing connection performance. However, the 
interactive dashboard that accompanies this report shows median and mean averages where 
available (and appropriate). 
Median averages more accurately reflect the experience of consumers, as average performance is 
not distorted by a comparatively small number of very fast, or very slow, connections. This approach 
is in line with the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) and the Committee of Advertising Practice 
(CAP)’s guidance on broadband speed claims and provides information that is more easily 
comparable to the speed claims that broadband providers make in their advertising. 
Figure 1 below shows the cumulative distribution of average 24-hour download speeds in March 
2023. The median average actual download speed (69.4 Mbit/s) is less than half the mean average 
speed (139.1 Mbit/s), as the mean is affected by a small share of lines with extremely high download 
speeds. We expect that the difference between the median and mean averages will continue to 
widen until the point when less than half of home broadband connections are provided using 
copper-based technologies, at which point it will start to narrow. 
Figure 1: Cumulative distribution of download speeds: March 2023 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows

 
7 
Download speeds 
Introduction 
Download speeds are important as they determine the time it takes for information to be 
delivered to a user’s device. Higher download speeds make a particular difference when 
downloading large files, such as games, films, or apps, or when streaming high-resolution video 
content. In this section we look at average UK download speeds and differences in download 
speeds between urban and rural areas of the UK. 
Median average download speeds increased by 10.1 
Mbit/s since 2022  
The median average 24-hour actual download speed recorded across UK residential fixed broadband 
connections was 69.4 Mbit/s in March 2023, a 10.1 Mbit/s (17%) increase compared to March 2022. 
This was mainly driven by people upgrading to superfast, ultrafast and gigabit broadband services, 
rather than improvements in the performance of individual broadband packages. According to 
Ofcom’s Connected Nations update: Summer 2023, 75% of UK homes had availability of gigabit-
capable broadband networks by May 2023, including 52% of homes where full-fibre services were 
available.  
Cable connections had the biggest increase in their median average download speed across 
technologies in the year to March 2023, rising by 71.3 Mbit/s (36%) to 270.6 Mbit/s. While 
considerable, this was lower than the 88.1 Mbit/s (79%) increase recorded in 2022. 
The average download speed delivered by fibre-to-the-cabinet (FTTC) connections increased by 5.6 
Mbit/s (11%) year-on-year to 55.7 Mbit/s. This was partly because of growth in take-up of G.fast 
services, which can offer advertised connection speeds that are more than double those of the very 
high-speed digital subscriber line (VDSL) technology used for most FTTC connections. Full-fibre 
connections recorded a median average download speed of 149.2 Mbit/s, an increase of 1.9 Mbit/s 
(1%) during the year. Asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL) standard broadband connections had 
the lowest average download speeds across all the technologies (11.7 Mbit/s) and average 
download speeds for these services fell by 0.8 Mbit/s (7%) in the year to March 2023. 
The average download speed of standard broadband products with an advertised speed greater 
than 10 Mbit/s and less than 30 Mbit/s decreased by 1.1 Mbit/s (9%) to 11.7 Mbit/s in the year to 
March 2023. Conversely, average download speeds for superfast, ultrafast and gigabit broadband 
products (those packages with an advertised speed of at least 30 Mbit/s) increased year-on-year, up 
by 7.4 Mbit/s (12%) to 70.7 Mbit/s. 
 
8 
Figure 2: Median average actual broadband download speeds: 2019 to 2023 (Mbit/s) 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [A] in the Sources Annex . 
Notes: The chart bars show that there is a 95% probability that the median average actual speed for all 
customers (i.e. not just the customer panellists within our sample) falls within the ranges shown; data labels 
show the median average values; ADSL comprises ADSL1 and ADSL2+.  
Ninety-three per cent of residential broadband lines 
were superfast products in March 2023 
The proportion of home broadband lines that were superfast products (those with an advertised 
download speed of at least 30 Mbit/s) increased from 91% to 93% in the year to March 2023. The 
share of lines with an advertised download speed of 100 Mbit/s or higher also increased year on 
year from 26% to 33%, while the share of lines with advertised download speeds greater than 300 
Mbit/s increased by four percentage points (pp) to 11%. This indicates that UK home broadband 
users are continuing to upgrade to faster connections. 
The increasing take-up of faster advertised broadband services is demonstrated by an increase in the 
actual download speeds delivered. The proportion of lines receiving a 24-hour average download 
speed of at least 30 Mbit/s was 88% in March 2023, up from 83% in March 2022, while the 
proportion receiving an average actual 24-hour download speed of at least 300 Mbit/s increased by 
3pp to 10%. 
Three per cent of lines had an average 24-hour actual speed less than 10 Mbit/s, the minimum 
download speed of a decent broadband connection, as defined by the Government for the 
broadband universal service obligation. However, less than 1% of lines had an advertised speed of 
less than 10 Mbit/s.  
Most lines experiencing actual download speeds of less than 10 Mbit/s will be ADSL connections 
experiencing poor performance. Since March 2020, people who cannot receive a broadband 
connection with a download speed of 10 Mbit/s and an upload speed of 1 Mbit/s have had the right 
to request an upgraded connection under the broadband universal service obligation. 
  

 
9 
Figure 3: Distribution of UK residential broadband lines, by advertised and 24-hour average actual 
speeds: 2019 to 2023 
 
Source: Ofcom / operators and Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [B] in the Sources Annex . 
Average rural ADSL2+ download speeds are less than 
half those in urban areas 
One feature of the technologies used to deliver ADSL and FTTC broadband is that connection speeds 
slow due to signal loss (attenuation) in the copper over which data travels. 
ADSL broadband is delivered over copper all the way from the local telephone exchange to the 
user’s premises, meaning the actual broadband speeds the user receives depends on how far away 
their premises is from the local telephone exchange. Urban ADSL lines tend to be shorter than those 
in rural areas (due to greater population density) and urban ADSL lines therefore tend to perform 
better than those in rural areas. Unlike ADSL, FTTC broadband is delivered using fibre optic cables 
from the local telephone exchange to the street cabinet, with copper being used to the user’s 
premises from there. This means there is generally a smaller variation in the length of copper line 
used to deliver FTTC compared to ADSL and therefore a smaller difference in performance for FTTC 
relative to ADSL connections.  
Our data shows that the median average 24-hour download speed for ADSL2+ connections (which 
make up almost all ADSL lines) in urban areas was 14.5 Mbit/s in March 2023, more than double the 
6.0 Mbit/s average in rural areas. Median average urban and rural 24-hour FTTC download speeds 
were 55.4 Mbit/s and 50.7 Mbit/s respectively in March 2023, however, there were no statistically 
significant differences between these speeds, or between the average urban and rural FTTC 
download speeds in any of the time periods that we looked at. 
Average rural FTTC download speeds in March 2023 were over eight times faster than average rural 
ADSL2+ download speeds, suggesting that most rural ADSL users who migrate to an FTTC service will 
receive a significantly improved user experience. 

 
10 
Figure 4: Median average ADSL2+ and FTTC download speeds, by rurality: March 2023 (Mbit/s) 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [C] in the Sources Annex . 
Notes: The chart bars show that there is a 95% probability that the median average actual speed for all 
customers (i.e. not just the customer panellists within our sample) falls within the ranges shown; data labels 
show the median average values 
The gap between rural and urban download speeds has 
narrowed 
In March 2023 there was a 14.3 Mbit/s (26%) difference between the median average peak-time 
download speeds in urban (70.3 Mbit/s) and rural (56.0 Mbit/s) areas of the UK. This was less than 
the 22.7 Mbit/s (58% difference) in March 2022.  
There was a 10pp difference between the proportion of urban (88%) and rural (78%) lines with an 
average evening peak-time speed of 30 Mbit/s or higher in March 2023. This was lower than the 
19pp difference found in March 2022. The 7pp difference between the March 2023 proportions of 
urban (1%) and rural (8%) lines with an average 8-10pm peak-time actual download speed of less 
than 10 Mbit/s was also considerably lower than the 13pp difference recorded in March 2022. 
Figure 5: Distribution of average 8-10pm peak-time home broadband download speeds, by 
rurality: 2021 to 2023 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [D] in the Sources Annex . 
 

 
11 
Download speeds: network slowdown 
Introduction 
Average download speeds can slow when broadband networks are busy. This is known as network 
congestion or contention. In this section we consider how network congestion affects download 
speeds throughout the day. 
Download speeds slow at peak time due to network 
congestion 
Across all connections, the average 8-10pm peak-time download speed (67.7 Mbit/s) was 95% of the 
71.0 Mbit/s average maximum speed, up from 94% in March 2022. Similarly, the average daily 
minimum speed (63.3 Mbit/s) was 89% of the average maximum speed, up from 87% in March 2022. 
Network slowdown was more apparent in the recorded speeds of slower connections than in the 
recorded speeds of faster ones. Our research shows that lines with an advertised download speed of 
above 10 Mbit/s and less than 30 Mbit/s (which are mainly ADSL2+ lines) had average peak-time 
speeds that were 92% of average maximum speeds. This compared to 95% for lines with advertised 
speeds of 30 Mbit/s or higher but less than 300 Mbit/s and 96% for ultrafast products with an 
advertised speed of 300 Mbit/s or more. 
Figure 6: Median average UK broadband download speeds, by time of day: March 2023 (Mbit/s) 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [A] in the Sources Annex .  
The effect of network congestion during busy periods 
is lowest for full-fibre lines 
Home broadband connections do not always provide their maximum or advertised speed for two 
main reasons: 
• Actual speeds tend to slow for all connection types when broadband providers’ networks are 
busy. The variation in speeds at peak-time (8-10pm) is often higher in cable connections due to 
network congestion occurring nearer to the customer, making it harder for cable operators to 
add the additional network capacity required to reduce the effects of congestion. 

 
12 
• For copper-based technologies such as ADSL, VDSL and G.fast, the maximum speed that a line 
can support is dependent on the length and quality of the copper line from the end-user’s home 
to the local exchange (for ADSL) or street cabinet (for VDSL and G.fast). Speeds can also be 
influenced by interference issues and due to these factors, the lines to some premises will never 
support the service’s advertised speed. However, under Ofcom’s Residential Voluntary Code of 
Practice on Better Broadband Speeds, broadband providers signed up to the code m ust provide 
an estimate of the speed that the line can support before purchase. 
Median average peak-time download speeds averaged between 94.7% and 96.3% of average 
maximum download speeds for 36-38 Mbit/s, 50 Mbit/s, 61 Mbit/s and 63-67 Mbit/s FTTC services 
in March 2023. Among 132 Mbit/s, 264 Mbit/s, 362 Mbit/s, 516 Mbit/s and 1.13 Gbit/s cable 
services, average 8-10pm peak-time download speeds were between 94.2% and 97.9% of maximum 
speeds.  
For 66-74 Mbit/s, 145-160 Mbit/s, 300-330 Mbit/s and 900-1,000 Mbit/s full fibre broadband 
services, average 8-10pm peak-time speeds ranged between 97.6% and 99.3% of their average 
maximum download speeds. Peak-time download speeds averaged 92.0% of maximum speeds for 
ADSL2+ lines. 
Figure 7: Variations in download speeds, by time of day: March 2023 (Mbit/s) 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [E] in the Sources Annex . 
Note: Data for 1.13 Gbit/s cable connections is taken from embedded test data, as outlined on page 5 of this 
report. While these measurements are valid, caution should be taken when comparing the performance of 
these connections to those of other package types.  
Figure 8 below gives an indication of how speeds may typically slow down on an individual line in 
peak periods. Unlike Figure 7 above, the values below are calculated as the median average of the 
ratios of minimum over maximum speeds for each individual panellist in a package category.1 The 
median average minimum speed was over 85% of their respective average maximum speed for all 
line types included in our analysis. Full-fibre services with an advertised speed of 66-74 Mbit/s had 
 
1 The data shown in Figure 8 are not comparable to those that would be derived from Figure 7 above. The 
values in Figure 7 show the median average minimum speed for each connection type as a proportion of the 
median average maximum speed for that connection type. This represents the variation in performance across 
the package category overall, but does not necessarily show the difference between minimum and maximum 
speeds that an individual line can expect to achieve. 

 
13 
the highest median average minimum speed as a proportion of their average maximum speed across 
the line types included in our analysis, at 97%. 
Figure 8: Median minimum speed as proportion of maximum: March 2023 (%) 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [F] in the Sources Annex .  
Notes: We use the advertised speed in this calculation where the average maximum speed is higher than the 
advertised speed to ensure than performance above what the customer might expect does not  result in a 
package type appearing to perform less well in this analysis. The chart bars show that there is a 95% 
probability that the median average actual speed for all customers (i.e. not just the customer panellists in our 
sample) will fall within the ranges shown; data labels show the median average values; data for 1.13 Gbit/s 
cable connections is taken from embedded test data, as outlined on page 5 of this report. While these 
measurements are valid, caution should be taken when comparing the performance of these connections to 
those of other package types. 
 

 
14 
Upload speeds 
Introduction 
Upload speeds are important for real-time video communication services, online gaming and 
uploading or sharing files.  
There has been a steep increase in median average 
upload speeds 
The median average upload speed of UK residential home broadband services increased by 7.8 
Mbit/s (73%) to 18.4 Mbit/s in the 12 months to March 2023. This was driven by increasing take-up 
of services with higher advertised download speeds, which typically also offer higher upload speeds. 
Figure 9: Median average UK fixed broadband upload speeds (Mbit/s): 2019 to 2023 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [G] in the Sources Annex . 

 
15 
Netflix streaming and disconnections 
Introduction 
Streaming video content requires a reliable connection, and higher broadband speeds allow for a 
better user-experience with less buffering and playback problems when streaming high-resolution 
video content. Disconnections can be inconvenient as users cannot undertake online activities 
when their internet service loses connection. 
Most broadband connections enable reliable streaming 
of Netflix content in ultra-high definition 
Streaming video content is one of the most bandwidth heavy activities that people use their home 
broadband connections for, and our Media Nations 2023 report found that 66% of homes used a 
subscription video-on-demand (SVoD) service in Q1 2023 with a similar proportion using 
broadcasters’ video-on-demand services such as BBC iPlayer and ITVX. We measured the 
performance of broadband connections when streaming content from Netflix, the UK’s most popular 
SVoD service, which was used by 59% of UK homes in Q1 2023. 
Figure 10 below shows the proportion of Netflix video streams that could be reliably delivered in the 
most commonly available resolutions – ultra-high definition (UHD), high definition (HD) and standard 
definition (SD) – for each connection type. These proportions are based on when one piece of 
content is being streamed from Netflix over a broadband connection: the streaming user-experience 
may diminish when multiple people are streaming content over the same broadband connection at 
the same time. While all Netflix customers can stream HD content, UHD resolution is only available 
to people subscribing to Netflix’s Premium plan and not all content is available in higher resolutions. 
Our Netflix streaming tests are run in such a way that these limitations do not impact the results 
(and all tests can record a successful UHD stream result if the connection is sufficient to support 
one).  
Over the 24-hour period, 73% of Netflix videos on ADSL2+ connections were reliably delivered at 
UHD resolution in March 2023, up from 69% in March 2022. Twenty-two per cent of Netflix videos 
over ADSL2+ connections were reliably delivered in HD, with a further 4% in SD. ADSL2+ connections 
may therefore be sufficient to satisfy the current broadband needs of smaller households. Netflix 
content was reliably streamed in UHD on nearly all superfast fibre and cable connections (those with 
an advertised speed of at least 30 Mbit/s), both over the peak-time and 24-hour period. 
 
16 
Figure 10: Proportion of Netflix videos reliably delivered at the given video quality, over 24 hours 
and at peak times, by technology: March 2023 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [H] in the Sources Annex .  
More frequent disconnections on ADSL2+ than other 
technologies 
To look at how often disconnections occur on broadband services, we analysed the average daily 
number of disconnections of 30 seconds or longer. However, not all the disconnections recorded in 
Figure 11 are caused by network issues: for example, a panellist restarting their router or network 
maintenance or upgrades undertaken by broadband providers during quiet hours would be 
observed as disconnections by our tests. 
In March 2023, 516 Mbit/s cable connections had the highest proportion of lines without any 
disconnections of 30 seconds or longer out of the package types included in our analysis (27%). 
ADSL2+ panellists typically experienced disconnections more often than cable or fibre panellists and 
had the highest proportion of lines with an average of more than two daily disconnections of 30 
seconds or longer in March 2023 (at 19%, more than double the 9% recorded in March 2022). This 
was also more than four times higher than any of the other connection types included in our 
analysis. 
Some home broadband services offer cellular back-up, whereby the router switches to a mobile 
connection if the fixed broadband network is unavailable. In the event of a disconnection, there 
would be little or no interruption for users who have a home broadband service that comes with a 
cellular back-up. 

 
17 
Figure 11: Distribution of average daily disconnections of 30 seconds or longer: March 2023 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows; see note [I] in the Sources Annex . 
Note: In some cases, testing may record scheduled maintenance as being a disconnection event. 
 

 
18 
Broadband package comparisons  
Introduction 
In this section we look at average upload speeds, download speeds and latency for several popular 
superfast and ultrafast broadband packages.  
As average speeds increase, connection speed has less influence on performance and other 
metrics such as latency (responsiveness) and packet loss (when data fails to reach its destination) 
become more important. The interactive dashboard that accompanies this technical report 
provides package comparison analysis over a wider range of metrics, along with tables that 
indicate whether any apparent differences in performance are statistically significant or not. 
Virgin Media’s 1.13 Gbit/s cable service recorded the 
highest average download speed of the packages 
included in our analysis 
To compare performance among popular broadband packages, we have used both data from the 
SamKnows Whitebox panel and embedded test data collected from some broadband providers. 
Embedded test data was used to supplement data from the SamKnows Whitebox panel where there 
were insufficient panellists, or where the Whitebox measurements did not fully capture the 
performance of a package. Packages which are highlighted grey in the charts throughout this section 
are those where the data source is wholly taken from embedded test data collected by the 
broadband provider, as outlined on page 5 of this report. While these measurements are valid, 
caution should be exercised when comparing the performance of these packages to that of others. 
The highest median and mean average 24-hour download speeds among the packages included in 
our March 2023 analysis was recorded by Virgin Media’s 1.13 Gbit/s cable service, at 1,137.1 Mbit/s 
and 1,123.9 Mbit/s respectively. This shows that while half of Virgin Media’s 1.13 Gbit/s cable users 
received a download speed of 1,137.1 Mbit/s (the median average) or more, the lower mean 
average shows that the distribution of speeds was skewed towards lower-speed lines, as was the 
case for all line types except ADSL2+ connections. 
The ‘Performance variation (ISP)’ section of the interactive dashboard that accompanies this report 
explores consistency in download speed user-experience in greater detail.  
 
19 
Figure 12: Average 24-hour download speeds, by broadband package: March 2023 (Mbit/s) 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows and ISP-provided embedded test data; see note [J] in the 
Sources Annex. 
Notes: Many other broadband packages are available, some of which may match or better the performance of 
those included in the analysis above; the chart bars show that there is a 95% probability that the median 
average actual speed for all customers (i.e. not just the customer panellists in our sample) falls within the 
ranges shown; grey bars indicate that the data for a package has been wholly derived from provider embedded 
data, as outlined on page 5 of this report. While these measurements are valid, caution should be taken when 
comparing the performance of these connections to those of other packages. 
The highest average upload speed was recorded by 
Gigaclear’s 300 Mbit/s full-fibre service 
Figure 13 below shows our finding that Gigaclear’s 300 Mbit/s full-fibre service had the highest 
median and mean average upload speeds among the packages included in our analysis, at 336.5 
Mbit/s and 313.7 Mbit/s respectively. This is a symmetrical service which offers the same advertised 
upload and download speeds. 

 
20 
On average, people with an ADSL2+ broadband connection who upgraded to a 36-38 Mbit/s FTTC 
service would benefit from an eight-fold increase in upload speeds, along with their download speed 
trebling. 
Figure 13: Average 24-hour upload speeds, by broadband package: March 2023 (Mbit/s) 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows and ISP -provided embedded test data; see note [J] in the 
Sources Annex. 
Notes: Many other broadband packages are available, some of which may match or better the performance of 
those included in the analysis above; the chart bars show that there is a 95% probability that the median 
average actual speed for all customers (i.e. not just the customer panellists in our sample) falls within the 
ranges shown; grey bars indicate that the data for a package has been wholly derived from provider embedded 
data, as outlined on page 5 of this report. While these measurements are valid, caution should be taken when 
comparing the performance of these connections to those of other packages.  
Full-fibre packages had the lowest connection delay 
Latency (responsiveness) is the time it takes for a packet of data to travel to a third-party server 
and back. Low latency will make web browsing more responsive and greatly improve the 

 
21 
performance of some real-time activities such as video-calling and online gaming. Most online 
activities require a response time of less than 100ms to provide a good user-experience, while 
some online gaming apps require a response time of less than 50ms. 
Full-fibre packages had the lowest median average 24-hour latency values of the packages analysed, 
recording latency values ranging from 4.9ms to 7.3ms. FTTC packages generally had slightly lower 
median average 24-hour latency values relative to cable, with FTTC’s highest (worst) median latency 
(12.5ms for TalkTalk’s 67 Mbit/s package) matching the lowest (best) cable latency recorded of the 
packages included (12.5ms for Virgin Media’s 516 Mbit/s cable package). 
The highest (worst) latency values recorded across the technologies tested were found in ADSL2+ 
connections, but these only averaged around 24ms, a level at which it was still unlikely to negatively 
affect the user experience for most use cases. 
Figure 14: Average 24-hour latency, by broadband package: March 2023 (ms, lower is better) 
 
Source: Ofcom, using data provided by SamKnows and ISP -provided embedded test data; see note [J] in the 
Sources Annex. 
Notes: Many other broadband packages are available, some of which may match or better the performance of 
those included in the analysis above; the chart bars show that there is a 95% probability that the median 
average actual speed for all customers (i.e. not just the customer panellists in our sample) falls within the 

 
22 
ranges shown; grey bars indicate that the data for a package has been wholly derived from provider embedded 
data, as outlined on page 5 of this report. While these measurements are valid, caution should be taken when 
comparing the performance of these connections to those of other packages.  
  
 
23 
Geographic comparisons  
Introduction 
For the second year running, we have requested ‘embedded’ test data from some broadband 
providers for our analysis. Broadband providers can run performance tests like those run by 
SamKnows’ Whitebox measurement units from their broadband routers. This allows broadband 
providers to monitor network performance and help ensure that accurate connection speed 
information is provided to customers buying broadband services under the Residential Voluntary 
Codes of Practice on Better Broadband Speeds. 
This section includes some of our initial analysis of ‘embedded’ test data provided to Ofcom by BT, 
Virgin Media, Sky and TalkTalk. Further analysis of this data can be found in the interactive 
dashboard t hat accompanies this technical report.  
Notes on our analysis of performance variation across 
the UK nations and English regions 
BT and Virgin Media have SamKnows tests embedded into some of their customers’ broadband 
routers, while Sky and TalkTalk run similar tests through another provider, ASSIA Inc., in some of 
their routers. We requested embedded test data from these broadband providers covering metrics 
of upload speed, download speed and latency test data and, across the four ISPs, analysed data from 
around 564,000 panellists with embedded testing activated. All data was anonymised, and no 
individual users could be identified. 
The sample from each broadband provider included performance data relating to customers 
distributed across the UK and covered all services offered (although the samples were small for 
some packages). However, these samples are not designed to be representative of package take-up 
in each UK nation and English region and therefore it is not possible to draw conclusions regarding 
overall (average) performance in different parts of the UK. Having undertaken benchmarking of 
SamKnows and ASSIA test results against SamKnows’ Whitebox measurements, we found that while 
the results were broadly consistent and typically very similar (i.e. within a few per cent) there were 
some differences that mean that like-for-like ISP package comparisons are not possible at this stage. 
We have used this embedded test data from broadband providers to look at how different 
broadband packages/package types perform across the UK nations and English regions. The 
limitations noted above, and the fact that we have analysed the data as received from the four 
broadband providers and have not weighted it to account for differing customer base sizes, mean 
that the analysis in this section is only indicative. Nonetheless, the analysis does allow us to draw 
conclusions regarding geographic performance variations. 
We have looked at the performance of higher-speed services using the most frequently used 
broadband technologies in the UK: 
 
• second-generation ADSL (ADSL2+) services; 
• higher-tier (63-67 Mbit/s) VDSL-based FTTC services;  
• 300-330 Mbit/s full-fibre services; and  
• 1.13 Gbit/s cable services.  
 
24 
We used embedded test data recorded during the 8-10pm peak-time period, as not all the 
broadband providers we received embedded test data from run tests throughout the day. These 
results may differ from those highlighted elsewhere in the report, due to the reasons noted above, 
and the data being taken from a different source. Our results are calculated using test data collected 
from a minimum of 50 units for each package type in each UK nation/English region. 
The interactive dashboard that accompanies this report covers the performance of other package 
types. 
Regional variations were greatest for ADSL2+ services 
Across the UK nations and English regions, median average peak-time download speeds for ADSL2+ 
broadband services ranged from 8.6 Mbit/s in the West Midlands to 11.4 Mbit/s in the East of 
England region. The 32% difference between the highest and lowest average download speeds 
recorded was larger than that found for 63-67 Mbit/s FTTC services, where there was a 6% 
difference between the 69.8 Mbit/s lowest recorded average peak-time download speed (in the 
North-East of England) and the 73.8 Mbit/s highest recorded speed (in Northern Ireland). The 
smaller variation in FTTC speeds is because of the copper line over which data travels is shorter in 
length than over ADSL connections. 
Full-fibre services with advertised speeds of 300-330 Mbit/s recorded download speeds ranging from 
303.1 Mbit/s in the East of England to 305.2 Mbit/s in Northern Ireland and had the smallest 
regional variation of less than 1%. For 1.13 Gbit/s cable services, average download speeds were 
lowest in the South-West of England at 1,116.7 Mbit/s and highest in London at 1,131.6 Mbit/s, a 
difference of just over 1%.  
 
25 
Figure 15: Average 8-10pm peak-time download speeds for selected package types, by UK nation 
and English region: March 2023 (Mbit/s) 
  
 
Source: Ofcom, using ISP-provided embedded test data. 
Notes: Figures are indicative only; data not available for 300-330 Mbit/s full-fibre connections in the North East 
of England due to insufficient sample size. 

 
26 
The East of England had the highest average upload 
speeds for 300-330 Mbit/s full fibre services 
Out of the four package types included in our analysis, 1.13 Gbit/s cable services recorded the 
highest 8-10pm peak-time upload speeds, ranging from 52.1 Mbit/s in London to 52.3 Mbit/s in the 
North-West of England. Average speeds for 300-330 Mbit/s full fibre services ranged from 50.5 
Mbit/s in the North West of England to 51.6 Mbit/s in the East of England. For 63-67 Mbit/s FTTC 
connections, there was a difference of less than 1% between the lowest and highest recorded 
average 8-10pm upload speeds. ADSL2+ packages had upload speeds markedly lower relative to the 
other package types and the greatest regional variation between the lowest and highest recorded 
average 8-10pm upload speed (7%).  
Figure 16: Average 8-10pm peak-time upload speeds for selected package types, by UK nation and 
English region: March 2023 (Mbit/s) 
  

 
27 
 
 
Source: Ofcom, using ISP-provided embedded test data  
Notes: Figures are indicative only; data not available for 300-330 Mbit/s full-fibre connections in the North East 
of England due to insufficient sample size. 
