11Wessel and Wright
David Wessel and Matthew Wright
Center for New Music and Audio Technologies
Department of Music
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California 94720 USA
www.cnmat.berkeley.edu
[wessel,matt]@cnmat.berkeley.edu
Problems and Prospects
for Intimate Musical
Control of Computers
When asked what musical instrument they play,
few computer musicians respond spontaneously
with ’’I play the computer.’’ Why not? In this re-
port, we examine the problems associated with the
notion of the computer as musical instrument and
the prospects for their solution.
We begin with a discussion of our goals and re-
quirements for computer-based musical instru-
ments, raising the main issues that inform our
work. Then we discuss a variety of metaphors for
musical control that we have found to be powerful.
Finally, we discuss some of the technology we have
developed for implementing these instruments.
Goals and Requirements
Musical instruments and their gestural interfaces
succeed for a variety of reasons, most of which are
social in character. These sociological aspects, such
as the development of a repertoire for the instru-
ment, are beyond the scope of this article. Here we
will concentrate on factors such as ease of use, po-
tential for development of skill, reactive behavior,
and coherence of the cognitive model for control.
Relationships of Gestures to Acoustic Results
The image immediately called to most people’s
minds by the statement ’’I play the computer’’ is of
a performer physically interacting with the
QWERTY keyboard and pointing device of a typical
computer workstation live on stage. Many musi-
cians do indeed perform live music with this inter-
face, but we prefer to interact with more
specialized gestural interfaces, because they offer
lower latency, higher precision, higher data rates,
and a broader range of physical gestures than the
keyboard/mouse-type interface. There is also the is-
sue of the visual appearance of a performance and
the association of standard computer interfaces
with of/bullet5 ce work (Zicarelli 1991).
At the onset, it would be useful to consider some
of the special features that computer technology
brings to musical instrumentation. Most tradi-
tional acoustic instruments such as strings, wood-
winds, brass, and percussion place the performer in
direct contract with the physical sound production
mechanism. Strings are plucked or bowed, tubes
are blown, and surfaces are struck. The performer’s
gesture plays a direct role in exciting the acoustic
mechanism. With the piano and organ, the connec-
tion between gesture and sound is mediated by a
mechanical linkage (and in some modern organs by
an electrical connection). But the relationship be-
tween gesture and acoustic event remains in what
one might call a ’’one-gesture-to-one-acoustic -
event’’ paradigm.
One obvious feature of computer technology is
immense timbral freedom. Although skilled players
of acoustic instruments can produce a wide variety
of timbres, they are nevertheless constrained by the
sound production mechanism. In contrast, comput-
ers can produce arbitrary sampled or synthesized
sounds. A sample-playback synthesizer can repro-
duce any recorded sound in response to any ges-
ture. The extreme case can be found in tape music:
with the single gesture of pressing the ’’play’’ but-
ton, the acoustic result is an entire composition. A
more interactive middle ground is the kind of piece
where a performer steps through a sequence of pre-
recorded computer sound cues—for example, with
a foot pedal. An even more interactive example
would be the typical sampling keyboard, where
each key depression triggers a potentially different
sound. In each of these examples, the acoustic re-
sult of a gesture may be arbitrarily complex, per-
haps consisting of multiple perceived sonic events,
but the control model is still a one-to-one mapping
from gestures to acoustic results.
When sensors are used to capture gestures and a
computing element is used to generate the sound,
an enormous range of possibilities becomes avail-
Computer Music Journal, 26:3, pp. 11–22, Fall 2002
Ó 2002 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
http://cnmat.berkeley.edu/publications/problems-and-prospects-intimate-musical-control-computers-0
12 Computer Music Journal
Human Performer Musical Instrument
Evaluation by
Perception
Sound
Output
Intentions Motor
Program
Gestural
Interface Controller Generative
Algorithm
Physical Interface
able. Sadly but understandably, the electronic mu-
sic instrument industry, with its insistence on
standard keyboard controllers, maintains the tradi-
tional paradigm.
Figure 1 provides a conceptual framework for our
controller research and development. Our human
performer intends to produce a certain musical re-
sult. These intentions are communicated to the
body’s sensorimotor system (’’motor program’’). Pa-
rameters are sensed from the body at the gestural
interface. These parameters are then passed to con-
troller software that conditions, tracks, and maps
them to the algorithms that generate the musical
material. Admittedly, this diagram is schematic
and incomplete. One aspect that is not well cap-
tured by this diagram is the way in which perform-
ers’intentions are elaborated upon by discovery of
new possibilities afforded by the instrument. Exper-
imental and otherwise exploratory intentions are
certainly dear to us. We /bullet5nd that this albeit sche-
matic framework allows us to view the roles of hu-
man motor learning, controller mapping, and
generative software as an overall adaptive system
(Lee and Wessel 1992).
Unlike the ’’one-gesture-to-one-acoustic-event’’
paradigm, our framework allows generative algo-
rithms that can produce complex musical struc-
tures consisting of many events. In this model, the
performer’s gestures can guide and control high-
level parameters of these generative algorithms
rather than directly triggering each event. One of
our central metaphors for musical control is that of
driving or /bullet6ying about in a space of musical pro-
cesses. Gestures move through time, as do the mu-
sical processes.
Low ’’Entry Fee’’with No Ceiling on Virtuosity
We believe that ’’getting started’’with a computer-
based instrument should be relatively easy, but this
early stage ease-of-use should not stand in the way
of the continued development of musical expressiv-
ity. Most traditional acoustical musical instru-
ments are not easy to play at /bullet5rst but afford the
development of a high degree of musicality. On the
other hand, many simple-to-use computer inter-
faces proposed for musical control seem— after
even a brief period of use— to have a toy-like char-
acter. By this we mean that one quickly ’’out-
grows’’the interface by discovering the limits of
how it can be used. Many such simple-to-use inter-
faces do not invite continued musical evolution.
Is a low ’’entry fee’’with no ceiling on virtuosity
an impossible dream? We think not and argue that
a high degree of control intimacy can be attained
with compelling control metaphors, reactive low
latency variance systems, and proper treatment of
gestures that are continuous functions of time.
With the potential for control intimacy assured by
the instrument, musicians will be much more in-
clined to develop their performance skills and per-
sonal styles.
Latency Requirements for Control Intimacy
Latency is the elapsed time between a stimulus
and the response. Some kinds of latency are rela-
Figure 1. A conceptual
framework for our control-
ler research and develop-
ment.
13Wessel and Wright
tively easy to measure— for example, the time be-
tween a computer’s receipt of a control message
and the beginning of the audio event generated in
response (Freed et al. 1997). The conceptual model
in Figure 1 includes elements whose latency is very
dif/bullet5cult— if not impossible— to measure, but pre-
sumably all latencies within the human performer
have already been compensated for by the timing of
the motor program.
Few practitioners of live computer music would
deny that low latency is essential, but just how low
is the subject of considerable debate. We place the
acceptable upper bound on the computer’s audible
reaction to gesture at 10 msec, and the systems de-
scribed in this article provide measured latencies
closer to 7 msec.
Low variation of latency is also critical, and we
argue that the range of variation should not exceed
1 msec. Grace note–generated events such as /bullet6ams
can be controlled by percussionists with temporal
precision of less than 1 msec. This is accomplished
by controlling the relative distance of the sticks
from the head during the strokes. Timbral changes
in the /bullet6ams begin to become audible when the var-
iations in the time between the grace note and the
primary note exceed 1 msec. Psychoacoustic exper-
iments on temporal auditory acuity provide strik-
ing evidence for this criterion (Ronken 1970;
Henning and Gaskell 1981). As we will argue later,
prospects for the solution to the latency variation
problem can be found by using time tags or by
treating gestures as continuous signals tightly syn-
chronized with the audio input/output (I/O)
stream.
Representing Control Gestures as Events
and Signals
All music, in the end, exists as sound— that is, con-
tinuous variations in air pressure. However, the no-
tion of discrete events is a very powerful and
effective metaphor for musical control, providing
much-simpli/bullet5ed reasoning about rhythms, en-
trances and exits, notes, and many other aspects of
music. The long-term success of extremely note-
centric music languages such as the Music-N fam-
ily (Roads 1996) attests to the usefulness of this
model, and we believe that the representation of
some control gestures as discrete events is an im-
portant part of the toolbox for building computer
music instruments. OpenSound Control (described
later) and MIDI are network protocols that can rep-
resent musical events and communicate them to
our software.
Nevertheless, many musical gestures are contin-
uous functions of time and should be treated as
such— for example, the position along the string of
a /bullet5nger on a violinist’s left hand. We note that al-
most all traditional acoustic instruments afford
(and require) continuous control, and, for the most
part, it is this continuous control that makes them
expressive. Many sensing technologies exist today
that can transduce a variety of continuous physical
gestures and digitize them at high data rates; we
will describe some of our favorites later.
How do we get continuous gestural information
into our software? Although it is common to sam-
ple continuous gestures asynchronously (at rela-
tively low rates) and treat each change of the value
as an event (for example, MIDI continuous control-
lers), we are not satis/bullet5ed with this approach. In ad-
dition to the loss of the higher-frequency
components of our control signals from the long
times between ’’control change’’events, latency
variation destroys the /bullet5ne shapes of control ges-
tures and also introduces an unpredictable timing
error between the control gesture input to our soft-
ware and any audio signals that may also be input
to our software.
Our solution is to represent continuous control
gestures as audio signals and get them into our
software with the same high-bandwidth isochro-
nous data paths that we use for audio input. Be-
cause most control gestures do not have frequency
components in the upper ranges of the audible
spectrum, we can multiplex lower-rate control ges-
tures into a single audio channel. The new genera-
tion of software synthesis programming
environments such as Max/MSP (Zicarelli 1998,
2002), SuperCollider (McCartney 2000), Pd ( Puck-
ette 1996), and Open Sound World (Chaudhary,
Freed, and Wright 1999; see cnmat.CNMAT
.Berkeley.EDU/OSW) provide multi-rate signal pro-
cessing. In these programming environments, it is
quite natural to treat gestures with a sample-
14 Computer Music Journal
synchronous signal processing approach. An addi-
tional advantage is the ability to apply existing
audio DSP modules (for example, /bullet5lters, Fast Fou-
rier Transforms, and linear predictors) to process,
condition, and otherwise manipulate our control-
gesture signals.
CNMAT’s connectivity processor (Avizienis et
al. 2000) described below provides a mechanism for
getting continuous gestures into the computer in a
manner that is very tightly synchronized with the
audio sample stream. With this system, we demon-
strate a signi/bullet5cant increase in control intimacy.
Musical Features Desired for All Instruments
The traditional ’’one-gesture-to-one-acoustic-
result’’paradigm automatically provides many im-
portant musical features that must sometimes be
implemented explicitly. One of the most critical
features of any musical control system is a ’’si-
lencer,’’a mechanism that allows the performer to
gracefully shut down a musical process. More gen-
erally, the performer should always have control of
the overall volume and density of the sound an in-
strument is producing, even when a semi-
autonomous generative algorithm is handling the
details.
We believe that there should be some sort of cor-
respondence between the ’’size’’of a control ges-
ture and the acoustic result. Although any gesture
can be mapped to any sound, instruments are most
satisfying both to the performer and the audience
when subtle control gestures result in subtle
changes to the computer’s sound and larger, more
forceful gestures result in dramatic changes to the
computer’s sound.
Another feature we /bullet5nd very important is pre-
dictability. Although we want our generative algo-
rithms to /bullet5ll in musical details not directly
speci/bullet5ed by the control gestures, we always want
to feel that we have complete control, at least at a
high level of abstraction, over the sounds our in-
struments produce. We /bullet5nd the analogy of the con-
ductor useful: individual instrumentalists in the
orchestra determine /bullet5ne details, while the conduc-
tor exercises overall control.
The possibility of a performer’s controlling a gen-
erative algorithm raises issues about memory and
state. If the output of the algorithm depends in a
complicated way on the history of the control ges-
tures that have guided the algorithm, then the
’’predictability’’goal requires the performer to
know the algorithm’s state at any given time. It is
too easy to build interesting interfaces that place a
large burden on the performer’s memory. One alter-
native is for the computer to provide some sort of
display, typically visual, of its current state. Ideally,
the performer does not need to look at a computer
screen during the entire performance and will be
able to look at fellow performers and at the audi-
ence. One of our design goals has been to create
stateless or mostly stateless interfaces; the chal-
lenge in this case is to be able to produce complex
results without accumulating information from
multiple gestures.
Metaphors for Musical Control
As suggested in the introduction, metaphors for
control are central to our research agenda. We have
found the work of George Lakoff and his collabora-
tors (Lakoff and Johnson 1999; Lakoff and Nu´ n¯ ez
2000) on embodied cognition to be particularly ap-
plicable. They argue that abstract concepts like
time and space and even the loftier concepts of
mathematics are grounded in sensorimotor experi-
ence. We now present some of the metaphors that
have inspired the development of our controller
software.
Spaces of Musical Sounds and Processes
Spatial metaphors can play an important role in
characterizing the materials of music. The basic
concept is that sounds that are similar to each
other are placed proximate to each other in the spa-
tial representation.
A rich variety of spatial representations that go
beyond the one-dimensional layout of a traditional
keyboard have been proposed for pitch. Fred Ler-
15Wessel and Wright
dahl, in his book Tonal Pitch Space (2001), provides
a review of the work in music theory and music
perception and cognition on the spatial representa-
tion of pitch. W. A. Mathieu (1997) in his book en-
titled Harmonic Experience, uses a variety of pitch
lattices to pedagogical advantage. Two-dimensional
pitch space representations have been used as con-
trol structures in a variety of musical instruments,
most notably the button keyboards of Bandoneons
and accordions. Another example is Harry Partch’s
Tonality Diamond (Partch 1949) used to lay out the
bars of his Diamond Marimba. Keislar (1987) pro-
vides a review of keyboard layouts for microtonal
pitch systems and points out the importance of the
way transpositional invariance of pitch material
corresponds to translational invariance of the ge-
ometry of gesture. For example, on the two-
dimensional keyboard of Bosanquet’s enharmonic
harmonium (Bosanquet 1875), chords and melodic
patterns are /bullet5ngered identically in all transposi-
tions.
Timbre space (Wessel 1979) has been proposed as
a multidimensional musical control structure. Fol-
lowing the basic metaphor that similar timbres are
represented as proximate in the multidimensional
control structure, timbre space concepts have
found their way into a variety of control schemes.
One novel implementation of timbre space as a
musical control structure involves attaching a
pointing device to the tip of a wind controller. The
wind controller then becomes a pointing device it-
self and can be used in a very natural manner to
navigate timbre space. We have implemented this
idea by attaching a Buchla Lightning infrared-based
pointing transmitter to the tip of a Yamaha WX-7
wind-controller.
The metaphor of geometric translational invari-
ance can be generalized to control attributes other
than pitch. A number of experiments (McAdams
and Cunibile 1992; Wessel 1979) suggest that tim-
bral sequence transpositions can be heard and pre-
dicted by parallel paths in timbre space. We suggest
that translational invariance in the spatial repre-
sentation of musical material is a compelling meta-
phor for the design of interfaces.
The spatial metaphor that maps perceptual simi-
larity to spatial proximity in the control interface
can be generalized to more complex musical pro-
cesses and structures, such as those involved in the
generation of melody, rhythm, and complex tex-
tures. One notable example is the musical texture
space provided by David Huron (Huron 1989, 2001).
Georg Hajdu (1994) has demonstrated the use of
Huron’s texture space as a control structure.
It should be noted that meaningful spatial con-
trol con/bullet5gurations can be produced without the
multidimensional scaling of tediously collected
similarity judgments for all pairs of sounds in the
set under consideration. We have found that plac-
ing the sounds intuitively in a two-dimensiona l
space works well, and we have developed a conve-
nient interface to assist in this task. With this di-
rect placement method, we have laid out useful
timbre spaces consisting of more than 120 sounds
in a few hours— a real gain in ef/bullet5ciency over mak-
ing more than 7,000 pair-wise judgments of simi-
larity. Experimental veri/bullet5cation of the validity of
the intuitive spatial layout approach to the collec-
tion of similarity judgments has been provided by
Goldstone (1994).
The direct placement method for laying out a
controller con/bullet5guration can be carried out with a
variety of criteria. In the loosest sense, the layout
need not have a priori dimensions associated with
it. The material can be laid out by similarity alone
with the possibility that an interpretable dimen-
sional structure will emerge in an ad hoc manner.
At another extreme, one could arrange things with
an a priori dimensional structure in mind. Yet an-
other possibility would involve layout constraints
based on the metaphor of translational invariance.
Whatever the constraints, one should not loose
sight of the goals of such interfaces: they should fa-
cilitate navigation in performance and suggest mu-
sically interesting trajectories for gesture.
’’Drag and Drop’’
The ’’drag and drop’’metaphor is well known to
users of the Apple Macintosh computer. An object
is selected, picked up, and dropped upon a process.
16 Computer Music Journal
This is a natural application of Lakoff’s movement
and container metaphors. Our use of ’’drag and
drop’’is based on gestural interfaces with two-
dimensional surfaces and accurate position sensing.
We represent both musical material and musical
processes as objects occupying area of the surface.
For example, the musical material might consist of
a collection of samples, and the musical processes
might be different ways of playing the samples
with or without looping, pitch shifting, etc. The
performer selects a musical object, drags it to the
appropriate part of the surface, and drops it onto
the desired musical process. This metaphor can be
extended with musical objects representing other
parameters of the musical processes, for example,
/bullet5lter shapes.
Scrubbing and Its Variants
Sinusoidal, granular, and other models allow arbi-
trary time-scale manipulation without changes in
pitch or spectral shape. ’’Scrubbing’’interfaces re-
quire controllers with very accurate detection of
one-dimensional position; this position parameter
maps to the time index of the sound model. Mov-
ing gradually from left to right at the appropriate
rate results in a resynthesis with the original tem-
poral behavior, but any other gesture results in an
alteration of the original. This interface allows a
performer to play more arbitrary musical material
while preserving the /bullet5ne continuous structure of
the original input sounds. This kind of interface
has been used in live performance contexts with
classical Indo-Pakistani singing (Wessel, Wright,
and Khan 1998), trombone samples with expressive
glissandi, and saxophone quartet material. Other
dimensions of sensed data can be mapped to syn-
thesis parameters such as loudness and spectral
shape.
’’Dipping’’
In the ’’dipping’’metaphor, the computer con-
stantly generates musical material via a musical
process, but this material is silent by default. The
performer controls the volume of each process— for
example, by using a poly-point touch-sensitive in-
terface with the pressure in each region mapped to
the volume of a corresponding process. Other ges-
tural parameters control other parameters of the
musical processes.
An advantage of this metaphor is that each musi-
cal event can be precisely timed, regardless of the
latency or jitter of the gestural interface. Once a
given process is made audible, its rhythm is not de-
pendent on the performer in an event-by-event
way. This kind of interface is most satisfying when
there are multiple simultaneous musical processes
of different timbres, allowing the performer to or-
chestrate the result in real time by selecting which
processes will be heard.
’’Catch and Throw’’
The ’’catch and throw’’metaphor involves the no-
tion of selectively trapping musical phrases from
an ongoing performance, transforming them in
some way, and then sending these transformed ma-
terials back into the performance. Transformation
of musical material is critical for this kind of per-
formance; literal echoing grows old very quickly.
An early application of this concept was used in
a work for Roscoe Mitchell and David Wessel enti-
tled Contacts Turbulants (Wessel et al. 1987),
which was commissioned by IRCAM in 1986.
Here, a standard MIDI keyboard controller was the
interface to a MIDI recording and playback system.
The lower octave of the keyboard became a 12-
channel MIDI sequence recorder, and the remain-
ing six octaves were used for playback. The
standard pitch meanings of the keyboard were com-
pletely abandoned. If a phrase produced by the
MIDI pitch tracker on Roscoe Mitchell’s saxophone
were recorded into the key normally associated
with, for example, the note C, then the C’s in all
octaves of playback keys referred to that material.
A different kind of transformation of the recorded
data was associated with each playback octave.
The essential idea of this performance situation
is that the performer at the keyboard captures ma-
terial from the companion performer and then
17Wessel and Wright
transforms and re-injects this material into the per-
formance. The recording and playback processes
run in parallel. In fact, the keyboard is fully poly-
phonic, and if one had enough /bullet5ngers, all 12 re-
cording processes could run while all of the
remaining keys were playing the transformed mate-
rial. The keyboard performer has complete control
over the initiation and termination of a recording
process, but there will certainly be some delay be-
tween the beginning of the phrase to be captured
and the decision that it should be captured. In
these improvisatory contexts, the keyboard per-
former is unable to decide if a phrase is interesting
to capture until after the phrase has begun. For this
reason, some computer-implemente d forms of an
echoic memory mechanism (Snyder 2001) are re-
quired so that the performer can reach back in time
to the beginning of the desired phrase. Automatic
phrase segmentation can be used to start and stop
the recording process at musically appropriate
times.
One of the challenges of the ’’catch and throw’’
situation is the memory load on the performer,
who is required to remember the caught phrases
and where they are placed. A visual or tactile
cueing system would help solve this problem. An-
other solution would be an adaptation of the
headphone-on-one-ea r technique used by disk jock-
eys who listen to material as they cue it for intro-
duction into the ongoing mix.
’’Catch and throw’’is a rich metaphor and lies at
the heart of musical dialog. In its most general
sense, ’’catch and throw’’is really ’’listen and re-
spond.’’
Technology
In this section, we describe some of the underlying
technology we have developed for building com-
puter music instruments.
Open Sound Control
Open Sound Control (OSC; Wright and Freed 1997)
is a discrete event protocol for communication
among controllers, computers, sound synthesizers,
and other multimedia devices that is optimized for
modern networking technology. OSC is an open
protocol, and OSC messages can be carried by any
networking protocol, including UDP and TCP/IP.
Entities within a system are named individually by
an open-ended, URL-style, symbolic, hierarchical
address space. OSC includes a pattern-matchin g
language to specify multiple recipients of a single
message. There is also a mechanism for dynami-
cally querying an OSC system to /bullet5nd out its capa-
bilities and features. OSC has been integrated into
Max/MSP, OSW, SuperCollider, Pd, Jmax (Dechelle
et al. 1999), Csound (www.csounds.com) , Native
Instruments’Reaktor (www.nativeinstruments.de) ,
Siren (Pope 2002), RTCmix (Garton and Topper
1997), Mike Berry’s Grainwave (www.7cities.net /
users/mikeb/GRAINW.HTM), and
SodaConstructor (www.soda.co.uk /explore/
osc.htm). (See www.cnmat.berkeley.edu /OSC for
more details and downloadable OSC software.)
OSC for Distributed Processing on Local
Area Networks
OSC was originally developed to enable distributed
processing on local area networks. In particular, we
designated the role of a ’’synthesis server,’’a com-
puter whose entire processing power would be de-
voted to sound synthesis. This frees the machine
physically connected to the gestural interfaces to
devote all of its resources to controller I/O, gestural
data conditioning and mapping, and implementa-
tion of control structures based on the metaphors
described previously. Many precedents exist for a
’’black box’’synthesizer producing sound in re-
sponse to control messages; it is conceptually easy
to provide an interface and a layer of abstraction
between deciding what should be sounded and the
implementation of that sound.
To achieve our overall latency and jitter goals
with this kind of system architecture, OSC pro-
vides high-resolution time tags and a mechanism
for specifying groups of messages whose effects
should occur simultaneously. Time tags allow the
receiving device (in this case, the synthesis server)
18 Computer Music Journal
to follow a scheduling discipline (Dannenberg
1989) that reduces jitter by trading it for latency.
Bene/bullet5ts of OSC Addressing
OSC’s symbolic names and open-ended hierarchical
name space grew out of our frustration with ad-
dressing limitations inherent in protocols such as
MIDI and ZIPI (McMillen, Wessel, and Wright
1994) that rely on short, /bullet5xed-length bit /bullet5elds. As
authors of synthesis servers, we wanted to name
our control parameters as we designed them rather
than pick from control parameter names pre-
selected by the authors of a networking protocol.
Likewise, we wanted to organize the control inter-
face according to project-speci/bullet5c structures with-
out being bound by /bullet5xed architectures such as
’’notes’’within ’’channels.’’
The features that make OSC attractive for repre-
senting synthesizer control messages also make
OSC good for representing the sensed gestures from
physical controllers (Wright et al. 2001). OSC’s
symbolic and numeric argument types are suf/bullet5-
cient to represent the parameters of all the control-
lers we have used. Symbolic parameter names
make programs easier to read and understand. The
pervasive use of OSC provides a uniform syntax
and conceptual framework at all stages of the
gesture-to-soun d mapping problem, from controller
data input to sound control output. An OSC inter-
face to a gestural-sensing or signal-processin g sub-
program is a powerful form of abstraction that can
expose all of the important features while hiding
the implementation.
A Programmable Connectivity Processor
The conventional approach for communicating
gesture and sound to real-time performance sys-
tems is to combine a microcontroller or DSP chip
with A/D and D/A converters and a network inter-
face, such as a MIDI serial controller. We have de-
veloped an alternative, more /bullet6exible approach that
supports scalable implementations from a few
channels of audio and gestures to hundreds of
channels.
Our new system to address computer music and
audio connectivity problems is based on integrating
all digital functions on a single /bullet5eld-programmable
gate array (FPGA). All functions are determined by
compiling high-level hardware descriptions (in
VHDL) into FPGA con/bullet5gurations. This approach
allows the considerable investment in developing
the interface logic to each peripheral to be easily
reused with a wide variety of FPGAs from different
vendors and of different sizes. Since FPGAs are
now available in sizes greater than one million
gates, entire DSP chips and microcontrollers can
also be integrated if required.
We have developed and tested VHDL descrip-
tions for processing serial audio data for the
S/PDIF, AES/EBU, AES-3, and ADAT lightpipe in-
dustry standards. Other VHDL modules support the
Synchronous Serial Interface (SSI) protocol used for
communicating with codecs; this allows us to pro-
vide multichannel analog I/O for both audio and
continuous gestures. We also provide modules for
multiple MIDI input and output streams. Although
such descriptions have been developed for proprie-
tary systems, this library of modules represents the
/bullet5rst complete, independent suite available in
VHDL.
This suite makes possible some unusual cross-
codings such as embedding gestural data in audio
streams, thereby increasing temporal precision by
exploiting isochronous data paths in the control
processor. We sample continuous gestural signals
at a submultiple of the audio sampling rate, multi-
plex the channels, and represent them as audio in-
put signals. This allows us to read gestural signals
into our software with the same low latencies as
audio input, and it guarantees that gestural and au-
dio input signals will be tightly synchronized.
A novel module of particular importance in por-
table computer-music performance systems imple-
ments Fast Ethernet all the way up through IP to
the UDP protocol of TCP/IP. Owing to the impor-
tance of Internet performance, Fast Ethernet imple-
mentations are extremely reliable and /bullet5nely tuned
on all modern operating systems.
A key feature of the connectivity processor is the
analog subsystem for continuous gesture acquisi-
tion. We currently provide 32 channels of analog-
19Wessel and Wright
to-digital conversion. Voltage ranges of the
converters are selectable, as are the sampling rates
and the appropriate anti-aliasing /bullet5lter cutoff fre-
quencies.
Our system combines VHDL connectivity mod-
ules that multiplex 8 channels of bidirectional au-
dio, MIDI, S/PDIF and transduced gestures into
UDP packets which are exchanged with a portable
computer using new, customized ASIO drivers in
Max/MSP. (See www.cnmat.berkeley.ed u
/connectivity for a more detailed description of
CNMAT’s connectivity processor.)
Digitizing Tablets
Throughout history, people have adapted whatever
objects were in their environment into musical in-
struments. The computer industry has invested sig-
ni/bullet5cant resources in creating broadly available,
low-cost gestural controllers without any particular
musical application in mind; thoughtful adaptation
of these controllers for music is a fruitful yet over-
looked route.
We /bullet5nd the latest incarnations of the venerable
digitizing tablet (also known as the ’’artist’s tab-
let’’) very interesting for musical control. Tablets
offer accurate and fast absolute position sensing of
cordless devices in three dimensions. Additionally,
pressure, orientation, tilt, and rotation estimates
are available. The tablet we use allows simultane-
ous sensing of two devices, usually one in each
hand. This rich, multidimensional control informa-
tion can be mapped to musical parameters in a va-
riety of interesting ways.
The most direct kind of mapping associates a sin-
gle synthesis parameter with each control dimen-
sion— for example, vertical position controlling
loudness, horizontal position controlling pitch, etc.
The high resolution of the tablet’s position sensing
makes this kind of mapping capable of /bullet5ne sub-
tlety, but the results of instruments with this kind
of mapping tend to be very homogenous; the chal-
lenge for the performer is to produce drastically dif-
ferent sonic results.
More interesting interfaces de/bullet5ne regions of the
tablet associated with particular behaviors. For ex-
ample, one region might consist of a grid providing
access to a large palette of musical material, while
other regions represent musical processes that can
operate on selected musical material. Repeating
rhythmic cycles can be represented graphically on a
region of the tablet, and sonic events can be placed
at particular time points within the cycle (Wright
and Wessel 1998).
One way to silence a process is for the performer
to place the pen on the process, and, using a circu-
lar motion like the traditional copy editor’s cursive
’’delete’’sign, the performer can silence the process
at a rhythmically appropriate point in time. Other
interfaces use the ’’eraser’’end of the pen to silence
processes.
We have created software in the Max/MSP envi-
ronment that we use to develop control structures
for the two-handed digitizing tablet. Examples in-
clude navigation in timbre space, multidimensional
synthesis control, note stream synthesis, and emu-
lations of the gestures of strumming, plucking, and
bowing strings.
’’Catch and throw’’interfaces have also been im-
plemented for digitizing tablets. Regions on the
tablet represent buffers that store the ’’caught’’mu-
sical material and can be thought of as virtual con-
tainers. Touching the pen to the tablet in one of
these regions begins recording. We map the hori-
zontal position of the contact point within the re-
gion to the amount of time to go back in the echoic
memory: touching the pen to the rightmost part of
the region begins recording from the current time,
while positions further left in the region begin the
recording from increasingly further back in time.
Joysticks
USB joysticks used for computer games also have
good properties as musical controllers. One model
senses two dimensions of tilt, rotation of the joy-
stick, and a large array of buttons and switches.
The buttons support ’’chording,’’meaning that
multiple buttons can be pressed at once and de-
tected individually.
Ali Momeni at CNMAT developed a modal in-
terface in which each button corresponds to a par-
ticular musical behavior (Wright et al. 2001). With
20 Computer Music Journal
Table 1. OSC Messages Output from Tactex
Triangle Detection
/area ^ area_of_inscribed_triangle&
/averageX ^ avg_X_value&
/averageY ^ avg_Y_value&
/incircle/radius ^ inscribed circle radius&
/incircle/area ^ inscribed circle area&
/sideLengths ^ side1 & ^ side2& ^ side3&
/baseLength ^ length_of_longest_side &
/orientation ^ slope_of_longest_side &
/pressure/average ^ avg_pressure_value&
/pressure/max ^ maximum_pressure_value &
/pressure/min ^ minimum_pressure_value &
/pressure/tilt ^ leftmost_Z-rightmost_Z &
no buttons pressed, no sound results. When one or
more buttons are pressed, the joystick’s tilt and ro-
tation continuously affect the behaviors associated
with those buttons.
Some Custom Controllers
At CNMAT, we have developed applications for
variety of custom controllers. Don Buchla’s Thun-
der is a polyphonic, continuous, multidimensional
interface that provides a two-dimensional surface
containing 12 continuously pressure-and position-
sensitive strips that are all sensed simultaneously .
This polyphonic continuous control is excellent for
interfaces based on the ’’dipping’’metaphor.
Tactex’s MTC Express controller (see
www.tactex.com ) senses pressure at multiple
points on a surface. The primary challenge of using
the device is to reduce the high dimensionality of
the raw sensor output (over one hundred pressure
values) to a small number of parameters that can
be reliably controlled. We interpret the output of
the tactile array as an ’’image’’and use computer
vision techniques to estimate overall pressure and
2D position for each /bullet5nger of the hand. The anat-
omy of the human hand makes it impossible to
control these three variables independently for
each of /bullet5ve /bullet5ngers. We have developed another
level of analysis based on interpreting the parame-
ters of three /bullet5ngers as a triangle, as shown in Fig-
ure 2. This results in the parameters shown in
Table 1. These parameters are particularly easy to
control and have the advantage of working with
any orientation of the hand— an application of the
metaphor of translational invariance.
Several of our current research projects exploit a
key feature of the previously described connectiv-
ity processor, namely the synchronization of con-
trol signals with the audio I/O stream. These
projects include an organ keyboard with continu-
ous sensing of each key’s position (Freed and Avi-
zienis 2000), a variety of micro-acceleromete r
projects, and new force-sensing resistor-type (FSR)
devices. In addition, we have developed new sensor
systems for multidimensional string motion (Freed
and Isvan 2000) and have made some advances in
extracting control signals from vocal sounds.
Conclusions
We have described our efforts toward the develop-
ment of live-performanc e computer-based musical
instrumentation. Our design criteria include initial
ease of use coupled with a long-term potential for
virtuosity, minimal and low variance latency, sup-
port for both event-based and signal-based control,
and clear and simple strategies for programming
the relationship between gesture and musical re-
sult. We believe that compelling metaphors are the
key to rich and expressive gesture-to-soun d map-
pings and presented some of our favorites. We also
presented some of the underlying technology we
have developed in the course of this work, includ-
Figure 2. A visual interpre-
tation of Tactex’s MTCEx-
press controller, for three
/bullet5ngers.
21Wessel and Wright
ing custom controllers and unique adaptations of
standard gestural interfaces, a programmable con-
nectivity processor, and the Open Sound Control
communications protocol.
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Rimas Avizienis, Adrian Freed,
and Takahiko Suzuki for their work on the connec-
tivity processor, as well as Gibson Guitar, DIMI,
and the France Berkeley Fund for their generous
support. Additional thanks to Doug Keislar and
Cynthia Null for their comments and suggestions.
References
Avizienis, R., et al. 2000. ’’Scalable Connectivity Proces-
sor for Computer Music Performance Systems.’’Pro-
ceedings of the 2000 International Computer Music
Conference. San Francisco: International Computer
Music Association, pp. 523–526.
Bosanquet, R. H. M. 1875. ’’Temperament; or, the Divi-
sion of the Octave.’’Proceedings of the Musical Asso-
ciation 1(4–17):112–158.
Chaudhary, A., A. Freed, and M. Wright. 1999. ’’An Open
Architecture for Real-Time Audio Processing Soft-
ware.’’1999 Audio Engineering Society 107th Conven-
tion, preprint #5031. New York: Audio Engineering
Society.
Dannenberg, R. 1989. ’’Real-Time Scheduling and Com-
puter Accompaniment.’’In M. V. Mathews and J. R.
Pierce, eds. Current Directions in Computer Music Re-
search. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, pp.
225–261.
Dechelle, F., et al. 1999. ’’jMax: An Environment for
Real-Time Musical Applications.’’Computer Music
Journal 23(3):50–58.
Freed, A., and R. Avizienis. 2000. ’’A New Music Key-
board Featuring Continuous Key-Position Sensing and
High-Speed Communication Options.’’Proceedings of
the 2000 International Computer Music Conference.
San Francisco: International Computer Music Associa-
tion, pp. 515–516.
Freed, A., A. Chaudhary, and B. Davila. 1997. ’’Operating
Systems Latency Measurement and Analysis for Sound
Synthesis and Processing Applications.’’Proceedings of
the 1997 International Computer Music Conference.
San Francisco: International Computer Music Associa-
tion, pp. 479–481
Freed, A., and O. Isvan. 2000. ’’Musical Applications of
New, Multi-axis Guitar String Sensors.’’Proceedings
of the 2000 International Computer Music Confer-
ence. San Francisco: International Computer Music
Association, pp. 543–546.
Garton, B., and D. Topper. 1997. ’’RTcmix: Using CMIX
in Real Time.’’Proceedings of the 1997 International
Computer Music Conference. San Francisco: Interna-
tional Computer Music Association, pp. 399–402.
Goldstone, R. L. 1994. ’’An Ef/bullet5cient Method for Obtain-
ing Similarity Data.’’Behavior Research Methods, In-
struments, & Computers 26:381–386.
Hajdu, G. 1994. Personal communication.
Henning, G. B., and H. Gaskell. 1981. ’’Monaural Phase
Sensitivity Measured with Ronken’s Paradigm.’’Jour-
nal of the Acoustical Society of America 70(6):1669–
1673.
Huron, D. 1989. ’’Characterizing Musical Textures.’’Pro-
ceedings of the 1989 International Computer Music
Conference. San Francisco: International Computer
Music Association, pp. 131–133.
Huron, D. 2001. ’’Tone and Voice: A Derivation of the
Rules of Voice Leading from Perceptual Principles.’’
Music Perception 19(1):1–64.
Keislar, D. 1987. ’’History and Principles of Microtonal
Keyboards.’’Computer Music Journal 11(1):18–28.
Lakoff, G., and M. Johnson. 1999. Philosophy in the
Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to West-
ern Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, G., and R. E. Nu´ n¯ ez. 2000. Where Mathematics
Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings Mathe-
matics into Being. New York: Basic Books.
Lee, M. A., and D. Wessel. 1992. ’’Connectionist Models
for Real-Time Control of Synthesis and Compositional
Algorithms.’’Proceedings of the 1992 International
Computer Music Conference. San Francisco: Interna-
tional Computer Music Association, pp. 277–280.
Lerdahl, F. 2001. Tonal Pitch Space. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Mathieu, W. A. 1997. Harmonic Experience: Tonal Har-
mony from Its Natural Origins to Its Modern Expres-
sion. Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions
International.
McAdams, S., and J. C. Cunibile. 1992. ’’Perception of
Timbral Analogies.’’Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society Series B 336:383–389.
McCartney, J. 2000. ’’A New, Flexible Framework for
Audio and Image Synthesis.’’Proceedings of the 2000
22 Computer Music Journal
International Computer Music Conference. San Fran-
cisco: International Computer Music Association, pp.
258–261.
McMillen, K., D. Wessel, and M. Wright. 1994. ’’The
ZIPI Music Parameter Description Language.’’Com-
puter Music Journal 18(4):52–73.
Partch, H. 1949. Genesis of a Music. New York: Da Capo
Press.
Pope, S. T. 2002. ’’Music and Sound Processing in Squeak
Using Siren.’’In M. Guzdial and K. Rose, eds. Squeak:
Open Personal Computing and Multimedia. Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, pp. 377–421.
Puckette, M. S. 1996. ’’Pure Data.’’Proceedings of the
1996 International Computer Music Conference. San
Francisco: International Computer Music Association,
pp. 269–272.
Roads, C. 1996. The Computer Music Tutorial. Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Ronken, D. 1970. ’’Monaural Detection of a Phase Differ-
ence Between Clicks.’’Journal of the Acoustical Soci-
ety of America 47(4):1091–1099.
Snyder, B. 2001. Music and Memory. Cambridge Massa-
chusetts: MIT Press.
Wessel, D., M. Wright, and S. A. Khan. 1998. ’’Prepara-
tion for Improvised Performance in Collaboration with
a Khyal Singer.’’Proceedings of the 1998 International
Computer Music Conference. San Francisco: Interna-
tional Computer Music Association, pp. 497–503.
Wessel, D. 1979. ’’Timbre Space as a Musical Control
Structure.’’Computer Music Journal 3(2):45–52.
Wessel, D., et al. 1987. ’’MIDI-Lisp: A Lisp-Based Pro-
gramming Environment for MIDI on the Macintosh.’’
Proceedings of the 1987 AES 5th International Confer-
ence: Music and Digital Technology. New York: Audio
Engineering Society, pp. 185–197.
Wright, M. and A. Freed. 1997. ’’Open Sound Control: A
New Protocol for Communicating with Sound Synthe-
sizers.’’Proceedings of the 1997 International Com-
puter Music Conference. San Francisco: International
Computer Music Association, pp. 101–104.
Wright, M., et al. 2001. ’’Managing Complexity with Ex-
plicit Mapping of Gestures to Sound Control with
OSC.’’Proceedings of the 2001 International Com-
puter Music Conference. San Francisco: International
Computer Music Association, pp. 314–317.
Wright, M., and D. Wessel. 1998. ’’An Improvisation En-
vironment for Generating Rhythmic Structures Based
on North Indian ’Tal’Patterns.’’Proceedings of the
1998 International Computer Music Conference. San
Francisco: International Computer Music Association,
pp. 125–128.
Zicarelli, D. 1991. ’’Music for Mind and Body.’’Elec-
tronic Musician 7(2):154.
Zicarelli, D. 1998. ’’An Extensible Real-Time Signal Pro-
cessing Environment for Max.’’Proceedings of the
1998 International Computer Music Conference. San
Francisco: International Computer Music Association,
pp. 463–466.
Zicarelli, D. 2002. ’’Max/MSP’’. Available at www
.cycling74.com/products/maxmsp.html.
